GOOD
EVENING EVERYONE AND WELCOME TO
THE NOVEMBER 12 WORK SESSION
OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL.
TODAY WE WE ARE GOING TO BE
LISTENING TO AND DISCUSSING
SOME EXCITING, EXCITING
PRESENTATIONS WITH RESPECT TO
THE MICHIGAN FUTURE GRANT
OPPORTUNITIES AND THE IRS
PROJECT.
BUT BEFORE WE GET THAT STARTED,
WE HAVE THE OATH OF OFFICE.
YOU KNOW WHO YOU ARE.
GO ON UP TO THE FRONT.
YEAH,
I DID.
I GOT MARRIED.
I GOT MARRIED MY FIRST YEAR
DENHA I CONCERTINA WIRE.
I BREATH AND TOGETHER DO
SOLEMNLY SWEAR OR AFFIRM THAT
SWEAR OR AFFIRM THAT WAS OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA THAT AMERICA
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN CONSTITUTION OF THE
STATE OF MICHIGAN AND THAT I
WILL FAITHFULLY DISCHARGE THE
DUTIES TO DISCHARGE THE DUTIES
OF THE OFFICE OF CITY COUNCIL
MEMBER OF THE HOUSE IN ORDER
FOR THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR,
MICHIGAN.
IF YOU A YEAR BEFORE YOU VOTE
FOR
WELL AS PROMISED THE PARTY
WILL START NO ONE BETTER THAN
MR. TONY.
MR. TONY, YOU HAVE THE THANK
YOU MAYOR.
GOOD EVENING.
WHERE MEMBERS OF COUNCIL
CONGRATULATIONS TO BE THERE
WERE SWORN IN THIS EVENING.
WE HAVE TWO ITEMS THAT WE'RE
GOING TO DISCUSS WITH YOU
TONIGHT.
THE FIRST ONE IS A PRESENTATION
BY MICHIGAN FUTURES.
THERE ARE TWO PEOPLE HERE, LOU
GLAZER AND DONNA LESINSKI.
THEY'RE GOING TO TALK TO US
ABOUT A GRANT THAT WE ARE IN
LINE TO RECEIVE BOTH OF THEM
WILL BE PRESENTING INFORMATION
TO YOU AND YOU'LL BE ABLE TO
QUESTION EACH PERSON WHEN
THEY'RE FINISHED TO SEE IF YOU
HAVE ANY QUESTIONS.
SEEMS LIKE A GREAT OPPORTUNITY
FOR THE CITY AND THEN AT THE
END OF THAT WE WILL MOVE ON TO
THE SECOND ITEM.
>> SO DONNA.
>> SO HELLO COUNCIL MEMBERS
THE
MAYOR AND WELCOME NEW COUNCIL
MEMBERS.
I REMEMBER MY FIRST SWEARING
IN.
IT'S A VERY EXCITING MOMENT.
SO CONGRATULATIONS.
SO I'M GOING TO START BY SAYING
I AM FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO KNOW A
NUMBER OF YOU AND SO IN MY
CURRENT ROLE I AM WORKING WITH
MICHIGAN FUTURE.
MICHIGAN'S FUTURE IS A
NONPARTISAN NON IDEOLOGICAL
THINK TANK WITH A VERY
BIPARTISAN BOARD THAT COMES
FROM ACROSS THE STATE INCLUDING
MEMBERS OF THE DETROIT REGIONAL
CHAMBER SKILLMAN FOUNDATION,
THE TREASURER OF KENT COUNTY
ETC. AND THE MISSION
OF MICHIGAN FUTURE WHICH WAS
FOUNDED BY LOU GLAZER BOTH
THREE DECADES AGO IS RISING
INCOME FOR ALL.
AND SO THE FOCUS OF MICHIGAN
FUTURE IS HOW DO WE CREATE
PUBLIC POLICY THAT ENSURES THAT
MICHIGANDERS ARE ABLE TO AFFORD
TO BE ABLE TO SEND THEIR KIDS
TO GOOD SCHOOLS, DRIVE ON GOOD
ROADS, SAVE SOMETHING FOR
RETIREMENT AND HAVE SECURE AND
STABLE HOMES AND FUTURES.
NOW MICHIGAN'S FUTURE IS
FOUNDED IN RIGOROUS DATA.
THAT IS WHAT WE DO.
WE LOOK THE DATA WITH A CLEAR
COLD EYE AND WEIGH IT AGAINST
PUBLIC POLICY INITIATIVES AND
SAY WHAT WORKS TO RAISE THE
INCOME FOR.
SO I WANT TO START WITH WHERE
WE ARE AND WE'RE GOING TO GO
THROUGH THIS A LITTLE BIT
QUICKLY.
A HANDOUT A PRE READ WAS SENT
TO YOU EARLIER.
WE DON'T HAVE SLIDES.
WE DON'T HAVE DATA.
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE ME FLAIL
AROUND WITH MY HANDS AN AWFUL
LOT AND AFTER ABOUT THREE TO
FIVE MINUTES THEN WE'LL STOP.
HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
BEFORE WE HAND HAND THE
PRESENTATION OVER TO LOU.
WE'RE HERE TONIGHT BECAUSE OUT
OF THIS DATA WE CAME TO THE
CONCLUSION THAT IN ORDER TO
RAISE INCOME FOR ALL YOU NEED
TO CREATE AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS
FOR ALL IN MICHIGAN WE'RE
SHRINKING AS A POPULATION.
WE'RE LOSING OUR YOUNG TALENT
CAPITAL AND BUSINESSES COME TO
WHERE TALENT IS NOW AND THE WAY
TO GROW AND RAISE OUR INCOME IS
BY KEEPING ATTRACTING KEEPING
AND RETAINING, CREATING AND
RETAINING YOUNG TALENT HERE IN
MICHIGAN.
SO WHERE ARE WE WHERE WE ARE
RIGHT NOW IS THAT SIX IN 10
MICHIGANDERS IN WASHINGTON
WASHTENAW COUNTY IS NOT AN
OUTLIER HERE.
SIX AND 10 MICHIGANDERS CANNOT
AFFORD TO LIVE A MIDDLE CLASS
LIFESTYLE SIX AND 10.
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT THIS
DECLINE IN HOUSEHOLD INCOME SO
NOT UNEMPLOYMENT MEASURES
BECAUSE WE KNOW SOME PEOPLE
JUST OPT OUT OF THE EMPLOYMENT
MARKET.
RIGHT.
AND THEY'RE NOT COUNTED IN AN
UNEMPLOYMENT MEASURE IN
HOUSEHOLD INCOME.
WE WENT FROM ONE OF THE MOST
BEING ONE OF THE MOST
PROSPEROUS STATES IN THE NATION
TO NOW WE ARE 30 NINTH IN THE
NATION.
WHAT THAT MEANS IS WHEN WE ARE
COMPARING OURSELVES WITH OTHER
STATES THAT CAN RANGE FROM
EIGHT TO ELEVEN THOUSAND
DOLLARS SITTING ON THE KITCHEN
TABLE FOR A FAMILY TO ACHIEVE A
MIDDLE CLASS LIFESTYLE.
SO IF WE WERE TO LOOK NOW AT
THE METRO DETROIT AREA COMPARED
TO CHICAGO THE METRO OUR AREA
IS SIX PERCENT BELOW THE
NATION'S CHICAGO IS 11 PERCENT
ABOVE AND WHAT WE NEED TO LOOK
AT IS HOW DO WE MOVE OUR
HOUSEHOLD INCOME UP?
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT AS FOLKS
ARE CHOOSING WHERE THEY ARE
GOING TO CREATE AND RAISE THEIR
FAMILIES, WHERE THEY ARE GOING
TO PUT DOWN THEIR ROOTS, YOUNG
PEOPLE WANT TO PUT THEM DOWN IN
HIGH AMENITY, WALKABLE, HIGH
PUBLIC AMENITY, WALKABLE, DENSE
URBAN AREAS.
>> ANN ARBOR IS ONE OF THE
GROWTH ENGINES IN OUR STATE HAS
ONE OF THE BIGGEST GROWTH
POTENTIALS IN THE STATE IF ANN
ARBOR CHOOSES TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THAT.
AND SO WHAT WE HAVE ADVOCATED
FOR IS FOR PLACEMAKING TO BE
THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PRIORITY FOR THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN BECAUSE WHAT WE
KNOW IS THAT ONCE TALENT
SETTLES THEN THEY MEET A
PARTNER.
THEY PUT DOWN ROOTS.
>> THEY MIGHT MOVE OUTSIDE
OF THAT DENSE ECONOMIC CENTER
TO A NEAR SUBURB TO RAISE THEIR
FAMILY.
BUT IF WE DON'T ATTRACT THEM IN
THE FIRST PLACE, THEY DON'T
LAND HERE EVER LOOKING AT THIS
THROUGH AN EQUITY LENS.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT OUR YOUNG
TALENT.
WHO ARE WE CONSIDER OURSELVES
IN THE DETROIT AREA TO BE A
MAJORITY MINORITY CITY THAT OUR
YOUNG TALENT, OUR YOUNG BLACK
TALENT ARE LEAVING OUR STATE AT
A HIGHER RATE THAN OTHER
GROUPS.
THEY'RE NOT FINDING OPPORTUNITY
HERE AND ARE NOT CHOOSING TO
STAY.
SO WHILE WE'VE MADE EFFORTS TO
CREATE MORE TALENT ACROSS THE
BOARD, WHAT WE'RE FINDING IS
THAT OUR GENERATION AFTER THEY
FINISH COLLEGE ARE SIMPLY
LEAVING.
I WROTE AN EDITORIAL IN THE
FREE PRESS SEVERAL MONTHS AGO
ALL THREE OF MY SONS NO LONGER
LIVE IN THE STATE OF MICHIGAN.
THEY HAVE ALL SAW OPPORTUNITY
TWO OF THEM BEGINNING IN
CHICAGO AND ONE OF THEM NOW
TRYING TO LAND IN CHICAGO FROM
WHERE HE IS.
AND SO WHEN WE FIND THAT OUR
HIGHLY EDUCATED YOUNG PEOPLE
ARE CHOOSING TO LOCATE IN
INCREASINGLY AND CONCENTRATE
THEMSELVES AN INCREASINGLY
TRANSIT RICH, VIBRANT CENTRAL
CITY NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ARE
WALKABLE AND HAVE AN ACTIVE
STREET LIFE, WE THINK HEY, THAT
SOUNDS LIKE ANN ARBOR.
I SAW A COUPLE OF YOU NODDING
YOUR HEADS LIKE HEY, WE'RE IN
LINE FOR THOSE YOUNG PEOPLE.
SO NOW HERE'S THE PART WHERE I
GET TO SCARE YOU RIGHT?
>> SO IF WE THINK ABOUT ANN
ARBOR AND WE THINK ABOUT THE
IDEA WHAT DOES OUR YOUNG
PROFESSIONAL POPULATION LOOK
LIKE COMPARED TO OTHER
COMPARABLE TOWNS BECAUSE ANN
ARBOR WINS ALL KINDS OF AWARDS,
VERY PROUD TO HAVE LIVED IN
WASHTENAW COUNTY AND WE BECAME
THE BEST RETIREMENT CITY WHEN
WE BECAME THE BEST THAT'S WHEN
WE BECAME THE BEST.
BUT HOW DO WE RACK UP WHEN IT
COMES TO LOOKING AT A FUTURE
WHEN IT COMES TO GROWING
MICHIGAN SO IF WE LOOK IN AT
WELL WE'LL FIRST LOOK AT
CHICAGO BECAUSE HOW MANY OF US
HAVE A FRIEND OR RELATIVE WHO'S
MOVED TO CHICAGO OR THE AREA OR
A YOUNG PERSON SO CHICAGO
INCURS A HIGH PROSPERITY
KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY REGION.
THEY HAVE AND WE'RE GOING TO
LOOK AT A COHORT OF TWENTY FIVE
TO THIRTY FOUR YEAR OLD.
SO KIND OF YOUNG PROFESSIONALS
AT THE START OF THEIR CAREER.
CHICAGO HAS THREE HUNDRED
TWENTY THREE THOUSAND TWENTY
FIVE TO THIRTY FOUR YEAR OLDS
COMBINING DETROIT, GRAND
RAPIDS, ANN ARBOR AND LANSING.
IF I BECOME A BAR GRAPH AT
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THREE
THOUSAND HERE COMBINED ALL FOUR
CITIES HAVE SEVENTY THOUSAND
FOUR CITIES OK AND I WAS A
MID-SIZED MAGNET HAS THE
POTENTIAL TO BE A MID-SIZED
TALENT MAGNET SO LET'S LOOK A
LITTLE BIT DEEPER INTO ANN
ARBOR, OUR MOST COMPARABLE CITY
IN THE GREAT LAKES REGION IS
MADISON.
SO IF YOU START LOOKING AT
CENSUS TRACKS AND YOU LOOK AT
AGAIN TWENTY FIVE TO THIRTY
YEAR OLDS MADISON CALDER CITY A
LITTLE BIT HARDER TO LIVE IN
HAS THIRTY SIX THOUSAND TWENTY
FIVE TO THIRTY FOUR YEAR OLDS
ANN ARBOR SIXTEEN LESS THAN
HALF.
>> SO NOW IF WE LOOK AT CENSUS
TRACTS AND SAY OK YOU KNOW AND
I WAS KIND OF KIND OF BIGGER
LET'S LET'S LOOK AT KIND
OF LOOK AT THE CENSUS TRACT
SIZE AND SAY OK WELL HOW DO WE
COMPARE THEIR AND IF WE'RE
LOOKING AT CENSUS TRACTS AND
THE CITY OF CHICAGO HAS SIXTY
NINE CENSUS TRACTS WITH AT
LEAST A THOUSAND PROFESSIONAL
YOUNG RESIDENTS IN THE CENSUS
TRACT, WE ALL KNOW HOW BIG
THOSE ARE.
THEY HAVE ANOTHER THREE HUNDRED
AND NINETY SIX WITH BETWEEN TWO
HUNDRED AND FIFTY AND A
THOUSAND YOUNG PROFESSIONALS.
>> MADISON HAS TWO CENSUS
TRACTS JUST TWO WITH A THOUSAND
TWENTY FIVE TO THIRTY FOUR YEAR
OLDS BUT THEY HAVE FOUR MORE
WITH ABOUT FIVE HUNDRED AND
ABOUT TEN MORE WITH TWO HUNDRED
FIFTY.
SO AGAIN WHERE DOES WASHTENAW
COUNTY AND WHERE DOES ANN ARBOR
WE TEND TO LOOK AT ALL
OF WASHINGTON COUNTY BUT THE
CENSUS TRACK IS IS ANN ARBOR
BASED.
WE HAVE ONE CENSUS TRACK WITH
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY WE DON'T
HAVE A CENSUS TRACK EVEN ONE
THAT HITS FIVE HUNDRED AND WE
DEFINITELY DON'T HAVE ONE THAT
HITS A THOUSAND WE HAVE ONE
WITH TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
YOUNG PEOPLE WITH BACHELOR'S
DEGREES BETWEEN AGES OF TWENTY
FIVE AND THIRTY FOUR.
SO LOOKING AT THIS AND THE FACT
THAT FROM TWENTY NINETEEN TO
TWENTY THREE CHICAGO INCREASED
ITS YOUNG TALENTS THIS IS
PANDEMIC BASED INCREASE THEIR
YOUNG TALENT IN THEIR CITY
DURING THE PANDEMIC.
TWENTY THOUSAND YOUNG
PROFESSIONALS MADISEN INCREASED
BY TWENTY TWO HUNDRED FIFTY
EIGHT ANN ARBOR DECLINED BY
NEARLY THIRTEEN HUNDRED.
SO IF YOU'RE LOOKING AT THE
FUTURE OF A VIBRANT CITY, THE
FUTURE OF A VIBRANT STATE IF WE
CAN'T KEEP, CREATE AND RETAIN
OUR YOUNG TALENT WE ARE GOING
TO CONTINUE TO DECLINE IN
POPULATION.
WE'RE CONTINUING TO DECLINE IN
HOUSEHOLD INCOME.
SO MICHIGAN FUTURE IS ALL ABOUT
LOOKING AT THE DATA WITH A COLD
CLEAR EYE AND SAYING OK, WHAT'S
THE SOLUTION HERE?
HOW DO WE CHANGE THIS?
WE'RE DIE HARD MICHIGANDERS
BORN AND BRED LIVED HERE ALL
THE TIME, SERVED OUR SERVED OUR
STATE BOTH OF US IN DIFFERENT
GUBERNATORIAL ADMINISTRATIONS
AS WELL AS AN ELECTED OFFICIAL
.
SO WE'RE FOCUSED ON TRULY
GROWING MICHIGAN AND STOPPING
THIS DECLINE.
WE HAVE TO PAY ATTENTION TO THE
FACT THAT THE STATES THAT GROW
ARE THE STATES THAT WORK FOCUS
TO ATTRACT AND KEEP YOUNG
TALENT BY DOING THAT IT MAKES
MONEY AND THAT'S WHAT YOU
SITTING AT THAT DESK NEED IN
ORDER TO MAKE THINGS HAPPEN YOU
NEED TO MAKE INVESTMENTS SO MR.
GLASER AND I OVER THE PAST TWO
YEARS HAVE WORKED VERY HARD AT
THE STATE LEVEL.
WE CREATED A FIVE MILLION
DOLLAR PILOT THAT FUND FUNDING
IN THE LAST BUDGET CYCLE AND A
TWENTY FIVE MILLION DOLLAR
BUILD ON THAT PILOT IN THIS
BUDGET CYCLE.
AND THAT'S WHAT LOU WILL
DESCRIBE TO YOU TODAY.
SO WHAT WE DID WAS WE SAID
LOOK
,TO CREATE A HUMANITY
NEIGHBORHOOD WE'RE GOING TO
FOCUS ON THE PLACES THAT HAVE
THE GREATEST POTENTIAL FOR
THAT.
THAT'S FOUR CITIES DETROIT,
GRAND RAPIDS, ANN ARBOR AND
LANSING.
THERE'S TWENTY FIVE MILLION
DOLLARS IS BROKEN OUT THROUGH A
COMPETITIVE GRANT PROCESS THAT
WE WILL DESCRIBE AND THE AMOUNT
IS NOT EVENLY DISTRIBUTED.
WHOEVER COMES WITH THE BEST
PROPOSAL WINS THE BIGGEST SLICE
OF THE PIE AS WE SAW WITH THE
FIVE MILLION DOLLAR GRANT
PROPOSAL, IT WAS NOT
DISTRIBUTED EQUALLY EQUITABLY
OR EVEN ALL THE CITIES.
AND SO WHAT WE'RE WHAT THIS
GRANTS THE MICHIGAN TALENT
PARTNERSHIP IS LOOKING FOR IS
TO BE ABLE TO INCENT ADVISE THE
CREATION WALKABLE, DENSE, HIGH
PUBLIC AMENITY NEIGHBORHOODS
THAT WILL KEEP ATTRACT AND
RETAIN OUR YOUNG PEOPLE AND
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE DATA WAS
ANYBODY SURPRISED?
I FELT LIKE I GOT A FEW
PEOPLE'S ATTENTION.
DID THAT FEEL LIKE A
DESCRIPTION WROTE TO YOU ANY
QUESTIONS?
>> ALL RIGHT.
I WILL HAND IT OVER TO LOU TO
TALK ABOUT YOUR OPPORTUNITY NOW
WITH THE MICHIGAN TALENT
PARTNERSHIP.
THANKS AND THANKS FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO TALK TO YOU SO
THERE IS TWENTY FIVE MILLION
DOLLARS THAT WAS ALLOCATED FOR
THIS MR. TALENT PARTNERSHIP IN
THE CURRENT YEAR BUDGET.
EIGHTEEN MILLION DOLLARS IS SET
ASIDE FOR THE FOUR CITIES THAT
DONNA MENTIONED DETROIT ANN
ARBOR, LANSING AND GRAND
RAPIDS.
EACH OF THE FOUR CITIES IS
GUARANTEED A GRANT BUT THE
ALLOCATION IS ENTIRELY
COMPETITIVE SO THEORETICALLY
THE STATE COULD GIVE SEVENTEEN
MILLION TO ONE CITY AND A FEW
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS TO THE
REST AND THEN THE OTHER SEVEN
MILLION IS AVAILABLE TO THE
REST OF THE STATE KIND THING
WITH NO GUARANTEE THERE'S NO
GUARANTEE THERE ARE SO
IMPORTANT COMPONENTS OF OF THE
GRANT PROGRAM.
>> THE FIRST IS IT IS FOR A
NEIGHBORHOOD SO EACH CITY IS
GOING TO HAVE TO PICK A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT THEY'RE
MAKING AN INVESTMENT IN IN THE
FOUR CITIES ARE RESTRICTED TO
ONE APPLICATION ONLY THE
APPLICATION HAS TO COME FROM A
CONSORTIUM THAT INCLUDES A
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, A NINE PROFIT
AND THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY AND
AND COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS AND
ANY OF THE ENTITIES OF THE
CONSORTIUM CAN BE THE GRANTEE.
SO IT DOESN'T HAVE TO BE THIS
IT COULD BE THE CITY DOESN'T
HAVE TO BE THE CITY.
PROBABLY THE MOST IMPORTANT
THING IS THE MONEY CAN ONLY BE
USED FOR PUBLIC SPACE
INVESTMENTS SO IT CANNOT BE
USED FOR BUILDINGS.
IT CANNOT BE USED FOR PROJECTS.
THE THEORY BEING THAT IT IS THE
PUBLIC SPACES THAT WHAT CREATES
YOUNG PROFESSIONAL DEMAND THAT
WE TALK ABOUT IF YOU LOOK
AROUND THE COUNTRY WE CAN USE
CHICAGO AS AN EXAMPLE YOUNG
PROFESSIONALS EVEN POST
PANDEMIC ALTHOUGH A LOT OF THE
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM IS IT'S NOT
TRUE BUT THE DATA SAYS
OTHERWISE ARE WAY OVER
CONCENTRATED IN BIG METROS WITH
VIBRANT CENTRAL CITIES THAT ARE
THE MOST EXPENSIVE PLACES TO
LIVE.
SO YOUNG PROFESSIONALS ARE
LOOKING FOR LOW COST PLACES.
THEY'RE NOT EVEN LOOKING FOR
LOW HOUSING COST PLACES BECAUSE
WHAT THEY'RE BUYING IS THE
NEIGHBORHOOD THEY'RE PAYING FOR
THE NEIGHBORHOOD NOT FOR THE
HOUSING.
SO THIS GRANT PROGRAM IS TO
CREATE NEIGHBORHOODS THAT HAVE
THE KIND OF CHARACTERISTICS
THAT ARE ATTRACTING YOUNG
PROFESSIONALS FROM AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
AND I WANT TO REPEAT WHAT DONNA
WAS SAYING BECAUSE I THINK IT'S
REALLY IMPORTANT THE REASON WHY
MICHIGAN FUTURE GOT INTERESTED
IN THIS IS THE SINGLE BEST
PREDICTOR OF THE AVAILABILITY
OF HIGH WAGE JOBS AND HIGH PER
CAPITA COMMUNITY IS THE
PROPORTION OF ADULTS WITH A
FOUR YEAR DEGREE.
>> NOTHING ELSE COMES CLOSE TO
PREDICTING PROSPEROUS STATES
AND REGIONS AND THE REASON THAT
YOUNG PROFESSIONALS MATTER MOST
IS IS THEY'RE THE MOST MOBILE.
>> SO THE PATTERN ACROSS THE
COUNTRY IS PRETTY CLEAR WHERE
YOU SETTLE IN THIS CASE AFTER
COLLEGE IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
DECISION YOU MAKE IN TERMS
OF WHERE YOU LIVE FOR YOUR
WORKING LIFE AND MICHIGAN
INCLUDING ANN ARBOR IS HAVING
TROUBLE ATTRACTING YOUNG
PROFESSIONALS IN LARGE PART
BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE THESE
TRANSIT RIDGE HIGH AMENITY,
HIGH DENSITY WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ARE
ATTRACTING SO THAT THAT'S WHAT
THIS OLD GRANT PROGRAM IS ABOUT
.
SO THE ULTIMATE GOAL AND IS SO
THE EIGHTEEN MILLION DOLLARS IS
NOT ENOUGH MONEY TO CREATE
THESE NEIGHBORHOODS.
I MEAN IT'S REALLY A START WHAT
WE'RE HOPING FOR IS
PARTICULARLY IN THE FOUR CITIES
THAT HAVE BEEN DESIGNATED HIGH
PRIORITY CITIES IS THAT THEY
WILL PROPOSE COMPREHENSIVE
PLANS.
YOU KNOW, I'VE BEEN SAYING THE
TWO HUNDRED MILLION DOLLAR PLAN
AND THE TWO HUNDRED REALLY
DOESN'T BUT IT'S THE WHOLE IT'S
WHAT THE WHOLE NEIGHBORHOOD
WOULD LOOK LIKE WHERE WE HAD
MICHIGAN FUTURE AND A NUMBER
OF LEGISLATORS AND SOME FOLKS
IN THE ADMINISTRATION ARE
COMMITTED TO WORKING TO AN
ADDITION TO THIS GRANT PROGRAM
TO GETTING MONEY OUT OF THE
OTHER STATE DEPARTMENTS FOR THE
REST OF THE PLAN.
SO IF THERE'S A ROAD DIET WHICH
TENDS TO BE REALLY EXPENSIVE,
WE WILL BE HOPEFULLY WITH YOU
TO GET THE TRANSPORTATION
DEPARTMENT TO FUND THE ROAD
DIET IF THERE ARE PARKS OR
OUTDOOR RECREATION WE WILL GO
TO DENHA SO THE PLAN IS NOT
JUST TO DO THE 18 MILLION
DOLLAR PROPOSAL.
IT'S TO DO THE COMPREHENSIVE
WITH THE GOAL BEING EITHER
THROUGH ADVOCACY WITH THE
DEPARTMENTS OR IN FUTURE
BUDGETS TO HAVE MONEY THAT
ALLOWS FOR THE REAL CREATION
OF THESE NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> ONE OTHER THING I SHOULD
MENTION IS IS THAT THERE'S A 50
PERCENT LOCAL MATCH REQUIREMENT
SO IT'S OUT OF THERE'S A DOLLAR
FOR DOLLAR MATCH.
THE PROGRAM WILL BE
ADMINISTERED JOINTLY AT LEAST
THAT'S THE CURRENT PLAN BY LEO
IN MEDICI.
THEIR PLAN AT THE MOMENT IS IS
TO AND THEY'RE BEHIND.
I WANT TO GIVE YOU A SENSE
OF THE TIMING ON THIS IS HIRE A
CONSULTANT THAT HAS SORT
OF SUBJECT MATTER EXPERTIZE IN
YOUNG PROFESSIONAL PLACEMAKING
TO DO TWO THINGS ONE TO HELP
THE STATE DEVELOP THE RFP AND
SCORING SYSTEM FOR CHOOSING THE
GRANT WINNERS BUT SECOND ALSO
TO PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
PARTICULARLY TO THE FOUR CITIES
THAT HAVE BEEN LISTED.
THE ORIGINAL PLAN WAS AN RFP IN
JANUARY.
I THINK THAT'S NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN GIVEN THAT WE'RE IN
NOVEMBER ALREADY THE CONSULTANT
HASN'T BEEN HIRED ON THE JOB
BUT MY HOPE IS EARLY IN 2025
THE RFP WILL BE OUT.
HOPEFULLY THERE WILL BE SEVERAL
MONTHS FOR CITIES TO PUT
PROPOSALS IN.
THEY HAVE TO ALLOCATE THE MONEY
IN THIS FISCAL YEAR THE MONEY
HAS TO BE SPENT BY SEPTEMBER
TWENTY TWENTY NINE.
SO IT'S NOT LIKE IT HAS TO BE
SPENT IMMEDIATELY.
THERE'S FOUR YEARS THAT YOU
HAVE TO ACTUALLY SPEND THE
MONEY SO THAT THAT'S THE BASIC
PARAMETERS OF THE PROGRAM.
WE'RE PRETTY EXCITED ABOUT
THIS.
I MEAN WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON
THIS FOR A LONG TIME.
OUR HOPE IS IS THAT WE END UP
WITH FOUR TERRIFIC PROPOSALS.
I MEAN THE STATE THIS IS REALLY
MICHIGAN'S BECOME ONE OF THE
POOREST STATES IN THE COUNTRY
OVER THE LAST 25 YEARS.
I MEAN WE'VE GONE FROM A 20TH
CENTURY WHERE WE WERE ONE
OF THE MORE PROSPEROUS STATES
IN THE COUNTRY TO NOW ONE
OF THE POOREST STATES IN THE
COUNTRY IN LARGE PART BECAUSE
WE ARE NOT PARTICIPATING IN THE
HIGH WAGE, HIGH GROWTH
KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY.
YOU CANNOT PARTICIPATE IN A
KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY WITHOUT
PROFESSIONALS, PARTICULARLY
YOUNG PROFESSIONALS AND IF WE
DON'T WE DON'T FIX THIS.
WE'RE GOING TO PERMANENTLY BE
ONE OF THE POOREST STATES IN
THE COUNTRY METRO DETROIT, THE
METRO DETROIT NUMBERS LOOK
BASICALLY LIKE THIS STATE.
WE WERE A TOP FIFTEEN BIG METRO
IN THE COUNTRY FOR MOST OF THE
20TH CENTURY.
>> WE'RE NOW FORTY NINTH I
THINK SO YOU KNOW WE'RE NOT
WE'RE VERY YOU KNOW, OFTEN WE
THINK OF ANN ARBOR AS PART
OF METRO DETROIT.
WE'RE NOT REVERSING THAT UNLESS
UNLESS WE BECOME A TALENT
MAGNET METRO SO IF YOU HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE PROGRAM I
MEAN I THINK SO FROM OUR
PERSPECTIVE.
YOU KNOW I'VE BEEN DOING WE'VE
BEEN DOING THIS PRESENTATION IN
EACH OF THE FOUR CITIES.
OUR HOPE IS IS THAT THE CITIES
GET STARTED NOW ON A PICKING
THE NEIGHBORHOOD WHICH IS SORT
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING TO
PUTTING TOGETHER THE COALITION
AND THE THREE BEGINNING TO
DEVELOP THE PLAN BECAUSE YOU
KNOW, THE BOILERPLATE FOR THIS
PROGRAM IS PRETTY EXPLICIT.
OH, I FORGOT THIS.
I FORGOT PROBABLY THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING I SHOULD HAVE
STARTED WITH THAT.
>> THERE ARE TWO PURPOSES
OF THE GRANT PROGRAM.
THE FIRST IS IS TO CREATE
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ATTRACT
YOUNG TALENT.
THE SECOND IS TO CREATE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOCAL
BUSINESSES.
>> SO THOSE ARE AND THEN AND
THEN THE BOILERPLATE SAYS IN
ORDER TO DO THAT THE PLAN HAS
TO INCLUDE INVESTMENTS IN
PUBLIC SPACES AND SUPPORT FOR
LOCALLY OWNED BUSINESSES.
SO IT'S PRETTY EXPLICIT.
I MEAN THE RFP WE'LL HAVE SOME
OF THE DETAILS THAT ARE
NECESSARY BUT THE BOILERPLATE
BASICALLY DESCRIBES THE PROGRAM
SO YOU DON'T HAVE TO WAIT TO
BEGIN TO WORK ON THIS.
SO OUR HOPE IS IS THAT YOU GET
TO WORK ON IT NOW AND YOU KNOW
AND HAVE ENOUGH LEAD TIME TO
PUT TOGETHER A TERRIFIC
PROPOSAL WHEN WHEN THE RFP
COMES OUT AND YOU'RE ABLE TO
MEET THE DEADLINE WHICH YOU
KNOW IT'S GOING TO BE A FEW
MONTHS SO I DON'T KNOW IF
PEOPLE HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT
THIS.
HOPEFULLY YOU'RE ALL EXCITED
ABOUT IT AS WE ARE AND AND WE
BEGIN TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF IT.
WE
IT IT IS YOU KNOW, IT'S
DISAPPOINTING.
YOU KNOW, IF YOU LOOK AT THE
DATA, IT'S REALLY DISAPPOINTING
THAT WE HAVE SUCH LOW TALENT
CONCENTRATIONS AND YOU KNOW
THAT THAT SINCE 2019 WE'RE
ACTUALLY GOING DOWN THAT UP.
>> I MEAN NATIONALLY THE NUMBER
OF 25 TO 34 YEAR A FOUR YEAR
DEGREE BETWEEN TWENTY NINETEEN
AND TWENTY TWENTY THREE IS UP
NINE PERCENT.
I MEAN THERE'S REALLY NO REASON
FOR ANN ARBOR TO BE HAVE GONE
FROM SEVENTEEN THOUSAND TO
SIXTEEN THOUSAND
.
>> HOW IS A NEIGHBORHOOD
DEFINED.
GOOD QUESTION.
>> SO I DON'T KNOW THE LAW
DOESN'T DEFINE IT YOU KNOW IT'S
AS THE LANGUAGE IS NEIGHBORHOOD
OR DISTRICT THE WAY I WOULD
DEFINE IT IS IS THIS WOULD BE
SORT OF A SET OF AVAILABLE
PUBLIC AMENITIES THAT ARE
WALKABLE.
I MEAN I THINK WALKABLE IS THE
MOST IMPORTANT PIECE OF IT.
>> SO YOU DON'T WANT TO BE SO
FAR THAT YOU CAN'T WALK TO IT.
SO AT LEAST THAT'S HOW I WOULD
THINK ABOUT DEFINING
NEIGHBORHOODS.
YOU USE THE PHRASE AND I
HAVEN'T LOOKED AT THE RFP THAT
YOU SAY HIGH AMENITY SPACES.
WHAT IS MEANT BY THAT?
OH, HUMANITIES.
YEAH
.
>> YOU KNOW SO THAT'S NOT
DEFINED EITHER.
I MEAN I THINK THE THINGS THAT
WE WERE LOOKING AT AND THAT ARE
LAID OUT IN THE LEGISLATION ARE
SORT OF THE STREETSCAPE RIGHT.
>> SO IT'S WALKABLE, BREAKABLE
KINDS OF STUFF.
IT'S PROBABLY TRANSIT.
IT CERTAINLY PARKS AND OUTDOOR
RECREATION.
IT'S ARTS ON THE STREET.
IT'S THIRD PLACES YOU BARS AND
RESTAURANTS AND ENTERTAINMENT.
I MEAN THAT'S THAT'S REALLY
AMENITIES.
SO I ALWAYS SAY TO PEOPLE PICK
YOUR FAVORITE NEIGHBORHOOD IN
CHICAGO OR BROOKLYN.
THAT'S THAT'S I IS I MEAN
THAT'S THAT'S WHAT YOU'RE
LOOKING FOR.
YEAH.
THERE THE REASON I ASK AND AS
I'M JUST THINKING THROUGH WHAT
THIS PROGRAM WILL DO YOU KNOW
YOU MENTIONED GRAND RAPIDS.
YOU MENTIONED HERE I MEAN I CAN
THINK OF NEIGHBORHOODS THAT I
WOULD DESCRIBE AS BEING THAT
CLEARLY THE NUMBERS BUT AT THE
MOMENT TWENTY TO THIRTY FOUR
YEAR OLDS DON'T THINK THAT.
SURE.
I MEAN THE NUMBERS ARE
SOBERING.
I HEAR WHAT YOU'RE SAYING BUT
THAT LEADS ME TO BELIEVE
THERE'S MUCH MORE GOING ON A
NEIGHBOR A NEIGHBORHOOD THAT
HAS AND I UNDERSTAND YOU'RE NOT
TRYING TO SOLVE ALL THE
PROBLEMS WITH THIS PROGRAM BUT
SO WHAT MOST BIG METROS HAVE
DONE IS THEY'VE STARTED WITH
REAL TRANSIT, RIGHT?
I MEAN TRANS IS PROBABLY THE
MOST IMPORTANT THING.
IT'S JUST YOU CAN'T DO THE
POLITICS OF TRANSIT IN MICHIGAN
HAVE TURNED OUT TO BE HORRIBLE.
THIS WAS DOABLE.
YOU KNOW, IF I HAD TO START
WITH YOU KNOW, IF YOU WANT TO
PICK THE MOST POWERFUL LEVER,
I'D START WITH TRANSIT WITH FOR
FIFTY YEARS WE HAVEN'T PUT THE
POLITICS TOGETHER ON TRANSIT.
SO THIS WAS DOABLE.
SO YEAH, YOU HAD TO START
SOMEPLACE.
>> I COMPLETELY AGREE ON THAT.
I THINK THAT'S ONE THE BIGGEST
ISSUES.
AND WHEN I THINK ABOUT THESE
PLACES BEING SEPARATE, THE FACT
THEY'RE SO DISCONNECTED AND
HARD TO GET FROM ONE PLACE TO
ANOTHER, I THINK IT'S A HUGE
PROBLEM.
>> SO IF ANYBODY'S INTERESTED
IN WORKING WITH US AND PUTTING
TOGETHER A PRO TRANSIT
PARTICULARLY RAIL TRANSIT FOR
METRO DETROIT COUNTERSIGN I
MEAN WE'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT
THIS FOR DECADES WITH NO I MEAN
IT JUST GOES NOPLACE OR THANK
YOU.
I HAVE A QUESTION AND THEN JUST
KIND OF A GENERAL COMMENT.
I APPRECIATE THE FOCUS ON
PLACEMAKING AND TRANSIT BUT
WHAT ABOUT HOUSING?
>> I MEAN REALLY AT ITS CORE UM
YEAH YEAH.
>> AND WE'RE LOOKING AT THIS
THIS NICE LITTLE PRESENTATION
THAT'S COMING TO US BUT UM YOU
KNOW, HOW DO YOU HOW DO YOU SEE
THAT FACTORING INTO WHAT'S
PROPOSED
?
>> SO I GUESS YOU KNOW I MEAN
THIS THIS IS A CHICKEN AND THE
EGG QUESTION YOU OBVIOUSLY NEED
BOTH BUT IF YOU HAVE THE
EVIDENCE AROUND THE COUNTRY IS
IS THAT IF YOU HAVE HOUSING AND
YOU DON'T HAVE I MEAN ANY
NEIGHBORHOODS YOUNG
PROFESSIONALS AREN'T GOING TO
COME RIGHT.
>> SO AT LEAST OUR THEORY IS IS
IS LET'S MAKE THE PUBLIC SPACE
INVESTMENTS WHICH HOPEFULLY
THEN INCREASE DEMAND WHICH THEN
LEADS TO THE SHUTTLE TO IFTA
SHOULD LEAD TO MORE DEMAND FOR
HOUSING WHICH HOPEFULLY, YOU
KNOW, WE CAN TAKE CARE OF .
>> I MEAN IF YOU LOOK AT IF YOU
LOOK AT IF YOU GO TO CHICAGO
TODAY THE FIRST THING YOU SEE
WHEN YOU'RE IN THE DOWNTOWN OR
NEAR DOWNTOWN AREA IS ALL THE
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ARE
DEVELOPING IS A ZILLION CRANES
BASICALLY BUILDING
UNPROFESSIONAL HOUSING.
SO SOMEHOW OR OTHER THEY'VE
FIGURED OUT HOW TO MAKE IT
WORK.
BUT BUT WHAT BUT WHAT ALLOWS
THE WHAT CREATES THE DEMAND FOR
HOUSING IS THE HUMANITY
NEIGHBORHOODS PLUS A PRETTY
GOOD TRANSIT SYSTEM.
I MEAN IT'S TO THEY GO TOGETHER
SO YOU NEED BOTH OUR SENSES.
>> IS THAT THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CHARACTERISTICS IS WHAT DRIVES
THE DEMAND FOR THE HOUSING
RATHER THAN THE OTHER WAY
AROUND.
>> HMM.
LIGHT OF OUR IN LIGHT OF OUR
OTHER PRESENTATION I'LL MERELY
SAY THIS IS AN EXCITING
OPPORTUNITY AND YOU KNOW I'M A
GRATEFUL FOR THAT PRESENTATION
FOR LETTING US KNOW WHAT WHAT
MIGHT BE IN STORE FOR US AND
FOR ALL YOUR DECADES LONG
ATTENTION ON THIS.
>> IT'S IT'S CRUCIAL.
YEAH.
AND THEN FEEL FREE TO REACH OUT
TO EITHER DONE OR IF YOU HAVE
QUESTIONS ANYTHING MORE AROUND
GOOD WE SURELY WILL.
GOOD THANKS VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU BOTH.
MR. DONI
.
SO WE'LL MOVE ON TO THE
DISCUSSION OF ARBER S START
WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF CITY
POLICY T.C. ONE T.C. ONE SIX
TONE CREATES AN ENVIRONMENT
CREATES CONDITIONS WHERE WE ARE
ANTICIPATING DENSITY, GROWTH
AND DEVELOPMENT.
IT IS ON PURPOSE THAT WE ARE
ENCOURAGING HIGHER DENSITY THAN
WE TYPICALLY WOULD SEE ARBORS S
IS A PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT THAT
IS WITHIN THE SPIRIT OF C ONE.
DURING TONIGHT'S PRESENTATION
YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR FROM THE
DEVELOPER TEAM.
THEY WILL LAY OUT THEIR VISION
FOR OPERA S YOU WILL HEAR FROM
JENNIFER HALL.
IT IS ENVISIONED THAT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WILL BE A
PART OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND YOU
WILL HEAR FROM CITY STAFF.
WE HAVE BEEN APPROACHED IN A
FORMAL WAY BY THE DEVELOPMENT
TEAM AND ASKED TO PARTICIPATE
IN THE PROJECT.
WE ARE UNAWARE OF ANY OTHER
PROJECT IN ANN ARBOR THAT HAS
EVER REACHED THE MAGNITUDE
OF WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR
ABOUT.
WE ARE ALSO UNAWARE OF ANY
OTHER CITY
WHERE A PROJECT
OF THIS MAGNITUDE HAS OCCURRED
WITHOUT CITY PARTICIPATION.
THE ONLY QUESTION IS WHAT DOES
THE CITY PARTICIPATION LOOK
LIKE FOR CONTEXT PURPOSES?
THIS IS A PRIVATE BYRON
DEVELOPMENT.
THESE ARE NOT CITY PARCELS,
PRIVATELY OWNED LAND.
OUR APPROACH THE
ADMINISTRATION'S APPROACH OR
OPPORTUNITIES THAT COME IN
FRONT OF THE CITY PARTICULARLY
LIKE THIS IS TO TRY TO GET TO
YES, THAT'S HOW WE HAVE
APPROACHED IT.
THAT'S WHAT WE HAVE BEEN
WORKING TOWARDS.
WE ARE NOT AT A POINT WHERE ALL
THE QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN
ANSWERED BUT WE ARE FAR ENOUGH
ALONG IN OUR WORK WITH THE
PROJECT MAKES SENSE ENOUGH THAT
WE ARE COMFORTABLE TALKING
ABOUT IT PUBLICLY.
THERE ARE NO VOTES THAT WILL BE
TAKEN TONIGHT AND WE ARE NOT
ASKING FOR ANY VOTES TONIGHT
IF
EVERYTHING HAS BEEN WORKED OUT
IT IS MORE LIKELY THAN LESS
LIKELY WE WILL COME TO YOU IN A
FORMAL WAY ASKING FOR YOU TO
SUPPORT CITY PARTICIPATION.
WHAT THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM IS
ASKING FOR IS THE CITY TO BUILD
OWN OPERATE THREE PARKING DECKS
.
THIS IS A DEVELOPMENT THAT
CANNOT POSSIBLY BE BUILT IN A
YEAR OR TWO.
SO YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
SOMETHING THAT WOULD BE BUILT
OVER SEVERAL YEARS.
THEY ARE NOT ASKING FOR THE
CITY TO BUILD THE PARKING DECKS
ALL ONCE THE PARKING DECKS
WOULD COME ONLINE AS
DEVELOPMENT COMES ONLINE OVER A
PERIOD OF TIME.
>> YOU WILL HEAR MORE ABOUT
THAT FROM MARTY PFM BECAUSE
WHAT WE HAVE BEEN WORKING ON IS
THE DUE DILIGENCE AROUND THE
ASK THE CITY WHILE WE ARE STILL
WORKING THROUGH THE DUE
DILIGENCE WE BELIEVE WE ARE AT
A POINT IN ENGAGING WITH OUR
CONSULTANT THAT WE CAN SAY IF
WE CHOOSE TO WE CAN IN FACT
BUILD OWN AND OPERATE THE
PARKING DECKS.
IT'S SIMPLY A CHOICE THAT THE
CITY WOULD HAVE TO MAKE THE
THIS PROJECT WOULD QUALIFY FOR
A BROWNFIELD TIF FOR A PROJECT
OF THIS MAGNITUDE.
YOU WOULD BE TALKING ABOUT A 30
YEAR TIF NOW THERE IS AN ISSUE
ASIDE FROM THE CURRENT PROJECT
THAT I THINK IS A LARGER ISSUE
FOR THE CITY WE DO NOT REALLY
HAVE INFRASTRUCTURE INTERNALLY
BECAUSE WE DON'T TYPICALLY DO
THESE KINDS OF PROJECTS.
I WOULD SUBMIT THAT IT IS NOT
UNUSUAL.
WE SHOULD ANTICIPATE THAT
DEVELOPMENTS IN OTHER C1
CORRIDORS WILL RESULT IN A
DEVELOPMENT TEAM COMING FORWARD
ASKING THE CITY TO PARTICIPATE.
WE SHOULDN'T VIEW IT AS THIS IS
THE ONLY TIME THIS IS GOING TO
HAPPEN AND IF IN FACT THAT DOES
HAPPEN I HAVE BEEN TALKING TO
THE STAFF ABOUT THE CREATION
OF A PARKING AUTHORITY.
OTHER CITIES HAVE THEM.
IT'S THE PROPER ENTITY FOR
SOMETHING LIKE THIS.
IT IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR A
PARKING AUTHORITY TO BE
CREATED IN TIME TO HELP THIS
DEAL.
SO IT'S NOT BARBASOL BUT IT'S A
PARALLEL THING THAT WE'RE
GIVING ATTENTION TO.
THE OTHER ISSUE THAT WE'RE
EXAMINING IS INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO WHILE WE GO THROUGH THE
PROCESS OF CELEBRATING OUR TWO
HUNDRED BIRTHDAY WE'RE NOT OLD
BY EUROPEAN STANDARDS BUT WE'VE
GOT AGING INFRASTRUCTURE SO WE
HAVE TO DO THE DUE DILIGENCE TO
DETERMINE IS THE INFRASTRUCTURE
IN THE EISENHOWER CORRIDOR
SUFFICIENT TO SERVICE THE KIND
OF DEVELOPMENT ARBOR SOUTH IS
TALKING ABOUT?
IT IS NOT THAT FAR FROM
BRIARWOOD THAT IS ALSO BEING
REDEVELOPED.
>> WHILE WE DO NOT HAVE A FINAL
ANSWER, WE BELIEVE IT'S MORE
LIKELY THAN LESS LIKELY.
THE ANSWER WILL BE THE CURRENT
INFRASTRUCTURE IS IN SUFFICIENT
TO SERVICE A DEVELOPMENT.
>> THE MAGNITUDE OF ARBER S PER
PUBLIC SERVICES IS WORKING ON
THE DUE DILIGENCE AND WILL
PROVIDE THE INFORMATION WHEN
THEY HAVE IT
AND MAKE SURE
DON'T LEAVE ANYTHING OUT THAT I
WANT TO SAY WE DO ASK THAT YOU
ALLOW THE FULL PRESENTATION TO
BE PRESENTED BEFORE WE GET TO
Q&A AND AGAIN WE'LL START WITH
THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM WILL THEN
GO TO JENNIFER HALL WILL THEN
GO TO MARTY AND THEN PFM AFTER
THAT AND WE'LL ALL BE INVOLVED
IN THE Q&A AT THE END WITH THAT
I'D LIKE TO TURN IT OVER TO
JEFF HOFFMAN WHO SHOULD BE
ONLINE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
MAYOR JEFF HOFFMAN IS JOINING
US ON ZOOME
STRALMAN YOU ARE
INAUDIBLE I SEE YOU HERE ON THE
CLARK SCREEN THAT YOU'RE NOT
COMING IN YET ON THE SCREEN
THAT WE ARE RECEIVING HERE IN
CHAMBERS OR THAT'S GOING OUT
VIA SEATON'S.
SO IF YOU CAN SIT TIGHT WE'LL
SEE IF WE CAN FIGURE IT ALL OUT
THERE THEY ARE
.
YOU'RE NOW VISIBLE MY THERE YOU
GO.
>> WE'VE GOT AUDIO HERE.
YES WE CAN NOW YOU'RE BOTH
VISIBLE AND AUDIBLE.
>> WONDERFUL AND I CAN'T SEE
THE DECK.
IS THAT ALSO BEING SHARED ON
ZOM?
IT WILL BE IT IS NOT PRESENTLY
OK WHENEVER THE DECK IS READY
I'LL PROCEED
.
THE DECK APPEARS TO BE UP.
>> ARE YOU STILL AUDIBLE?
I'M HERE.
>> EXCELLENT.
ALL RIGHT, LET'S GO TO THE NEXT
SLIDE THEN IT'S WORKING.
>> LET'S ROLL.
OK, I'M UP.
ALL RIGHT.
HEY THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SHARE WITH YOU A
PROJECT THAT IS OVER SIX YEARS
IN THE MAKING.
I'M JEFF HOFFMAN, CEO OF OXFORD
AND I HAD THE PLEASURE
OF INTRODUCING ARBER S AND THE
TEAM BEHIND IT.
MY APOLOGIES FOR NOT BEING HERE
TONIGHT WITH YOU.
I HOPE TO SEE YOU IN FUTURE
MEETINGS.
AS MANY OF YOU KNOW, I'M A
LOCAL OF TOSTIN KLEGG URAN YOU
AVAM AFTER WORKING A FEW YEARS
OUT OF COLLEGE I FOUNDED OXFORD
CLICK AND OXFORD'S TEAM OF ONE
HUNDRED PLUS PEOPLE WE MANAGE
WITH THE LARGEST COMMERCIAL
PORTFOLIOS.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY IS A
COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL IN
TOWN WITH FULL SERVICE FROM A
STATE INVESTMENT COMPANY AND
OUR FOCUS IS ON ANN ARBOR AND
ANN ARBOR ONLY AND A BIG PART
OF WHAT WE DO IS WE JUST WE TRY
TO MAKE EVERYTHING AROUND US A
LITTLE BETTER FOCUS TONIGHT ON
THE SOUTH SIDE DAYTON
EISENHOWER THE RIGHT HERE.
FIRST OFF, THIS IS KIND OF THE
OXFORD HIROTO.
THIS IS WHERE
WE SPEND A LOT
OF OUR TIME.
>> WE HAVE A LOT INVESTED IN
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD FOR MAIN
STREET, SOUTH INDUSTRIAL AND
EISENHOWER.
>> WE SPENT A LOT OF TIME
THINKING ABOUT HOW CAN WE
IMPROVE THIS AREA NOW IT'S A
MAIN INTEREST IN ARBOR'S
EVERYONE IS FROM ST. 94.
IT'S ALSO THE LARGEST OFFICE
AND RETAIL CENTER IN THE ENTIRE
COUNTY GRAND IS A GENERAL RULE
IS FAR LESS EXPENSIVE THAN
OTHER PARTS OF TOWN AND ALMOST
HALF THE COMMUTERS COMING TO AN
EACH DAY ENTER AT STATE IN
NINETY FOUR.
SO IT'S A REALLY IMPORTANT PART
OF TOWN SO WE'VE CERTAINLY
BENEFITS SUCH AS THE SOUTH SIDE
AS YOU CALL IT A DIAMOND IN THE
ROUGH WITH HOW THE CITY CAN
MAKE THE SEVEN GATEWAY INTO A
NEIGHBORHOOD KIND OF WISHING
YOU WAYS STUCK AROUND NOW THE
LOW DENSITY AND ACRES
OF PARKING LOTS OFFERS
TREMENDOUS OPPORTUNITIES FOR
REDEVELOPMENT.
MANY THOUSANDS OF UNITS
OF DESPERATELY NEEDED HOUSING.
SO WE BEGAN DISCUSSING IDEAS
AND HOW TO DEVELOP THE AREA
YEARS AGO WITH THE PLANNING
DEPARTMENT AND DISCUSSIONS
EVOLVED WITH THE CITY COUNCIL
AND THANK YOU CITY COUNCIL.
WE NOW HAVE TO SEE ONE ZONING
AND THE OPPORTUNITY TO ADDRESS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLACEMAKING
AND SUSTAINABILITY ON A MUCH
LARGER SCALE EXCITING LIFE
BEGINS HERE THIS IS THE PARKING
LOT SURROUNDING THE ICONIC
SEVEN SEVEN SEVEN BUILDING
WINDOW TO THE WEST OF THE STATE
STREET GOING NORTH SOUTH AND
EISENHOWER JUST BELOW IT GOING
EAST WEST IN THIS AREA OUTLINED
BY THE ORANGE LINES THERE WE
ENVISION MORE THAN 1000 DIVERSE
RESIDENTIAL UNITS IN A WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOOD ALLOWING SCRUMMING
RESIDENTS ALL THE NEIGHBORHOODS
AROUND THIS AREA THE ABILITY TO
ACCESS AMENITIES BY BIKE OR
FOOT WITH EASY CONNECTIVITY
CHIPOLATA THAT MEANS OVER
FIFTEEN HUNDRED PEOPLE WILL BE
ABLE TO LIVE, WORK AND PLAY
HERE WITH MOST HOUSEHOLDS BEING
ABLE TO SIGNIFICANTLY LIMIT
THEIR USE OF CARS.
THIS WILL BE A COMMUNITY HUB
CREATING AN ENERGY LIKE NEVER
IN THE AREA.
WE HAD TO FIND SOMEONE TO HELP
US BRING OUR VISION TO
FRUITION.
WE ARE WE DO A LOT OF THINGS AT
OXFORD BUT WE DON'T DO GROUND
UP DEVELOPMENT.
>> SO NEXT SLIDE PLEASE.
WE SPENT OVER TWO YEARS MEETING
WITH DEVELOPERS FROM ALL AROUND
THE MIDWEST.
LOTS OF THEM TRIED TO SAY OH WE
COULD DO THIS, WE COULD DO
THAT.
WE'LL BUILD THIS BIG APARTMENT
.
BUT IT WASN'T RIGHT.
WE'RE TRYING TO FIND THE RIGHT
PARTNER WHO SHARED BOTH THE
VISION AND THE CULTURE AND WE
DISCOVERED SOMETHING REALLY
SPECIAL.
THIS IS BRIDGE PARK IN DUBLIN,
OHIO AND IT'S EXACTLY WHAT WE
ENVISIONED WALKABLE GROUND
FLOOR RETAIL WITH HOUSING AND
OFFICES ABOVE PARKING
STRUCTURES AND STRATEGICALLY
INTERSPERSED THROUGHOUT THE
DEVELOPMENT JUST ENOUGH TO MAKE
IT WORK GALLERY SPACES
SCATTERED THROUGHOUT GREAT
ENERGY AND THAT LED US TO A
PARTNERSHIP WITH CRAWFORD
HOYNE, ITS DEVELOPER THE
CRAWFORD WIND TEAM HAS DONE
OVER TWO REALLY BE TWO BILLION
DOLLARS IN MIXED USE
DEVELOPMENTS LIKE THIS.
>> SO WE FELT VERY COMFORTABLE
.
THEY HAVE THE EXPERIENCE AND
THE RESOURCES NECESSARY TO MAKE
OURSELVES A SUCCESS AND WITH
THAT I LIKE TO INTRODUCE RUSS
HUNTER, ONE OF THE VISIONARIES
BEHIND WHAT WE'VE DESIGNED TO
INTRODUCE THE DEVELOPMENT IN
THE CRAWFORD RANCH WAS THANK
YOU JEFF AND GOOD EVENING
EVERYBODY.
SO I LEAD OUR DEVELOPMENT TEAM
AT CRAWFORD.
HOYING RUSSELL HUNTER IS MY
NAME AND IN A PREVIOUS LIFE I
WAS AN ARCHITECT.
IT'S ACTUALLY WHEN I WENT TO
SCHOOL FOR ARCHITECTURE AND
PLANNING DID THAT FOR OVER TEN
YEARS BEFORE I JOINED OUR TEAM.
I ALWAYS LIKE TO SAY IT WAS
ACTUALLY THE DEVELOPMENT
COMPANY I WAS THERE OUR FIRST
HIRE SO I'M REALLY, REALLY
EXCITED ABOUT THE OPPORTUNITY
THAT WE HAVE HERE IN FRONT
OF US WITH ARBER S AND IT'S
IT'S SIMPLY ABOUT SCALE.
IT'S IT'S NOT VERY OFTEN THAT
YOU GET A SITE THAT HAS THIS
AMOUNT OF SCALE THAT GIVES YOU
THE FLEXIBILITY TO DO SOME
REALLY, REALLY IMPRESSIVE
THINGS PLACEMAKING I COULD NOT
BELIEVE I WAS HEARING THAT WORD
EARLIER TONIGHT BECAUSE THAT'S
REALLY WHAT WHAT WE'RE SETTING
OUT TO DO THE ABILITY TO CREATE
A NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE YOU CAN
CONTROL BOTH SIDES OF THE
STREET THAT IS PLACEMAKING
WHERE YOU CAN WHERE EVERYTHING
IS AROUND A CENTRAL HUB AT THE
END OF THE DAY FOR ME IT'S NOT
ABOUT THE BUILDINGS, IT'S THE
SPACES BETWEEN THEM THAT MAKE
THE PLACE SPECIAL AND THAT'S
REALLY WHAT WHAT WE'RE TRYING
TO DO HERE.
SO COMPLETE STREETS GATEWAY
OPPORTUNITIES, OPEN SPACES BOTH
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.
THESE ARE THIS IS REALLY,
REALLY IMPORTANT.
WE'LL TALK ABOUT THAT A LITTLE
BIT LATER.
BUT IT'S SORT OF BACKYARD
VERSUS FRONT YARD MENTALITY
WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT THE PEOPLE
THAT WANT TO CALL THIS HOME,
YOU WANT TO BE ABLE TO BRING
EVERYONE INTO YOUR HOME BUT YOU
ALSO WANT TO BE ABLE TO HAVE
PRIVATE OUTDOOR SPACES THAT YOU
CAN FEEL COMFORTABLE IN AND
NEIGHBORHOOD PROGRAMING AND
THIS IS ANOTHER THING WE'LL
TALK ABOUT LATER.
BUT I THINK IT'S A LOT
OF LESSONS THAT WE'VE LEARNED
SPECIFICALLY AT BRIDGE PARK AND
THAT WE'VE TAKEN TO SOME OF OUR
OTHER COMMUNITIES.
THAT IS A GAME CHANGER AND FOR
THE SORT OF COMMUNITY BUILDING
THAT YOU CAN DO WITH AN
OPPORTUNITY LIKE THIS.
SO THIS IS THIS IS THE PROGRAM
JEFF HAD ALREADY MENTIONED.
THIS IS HOUSING FIRST.
RIGHT.
AND YOU CAN SEE THAT IT'S OVER
A THOUSAND UNITS OF HOUSING.
WE'VE GOT A REALLY WONDERFUL
OPPORTUNITY IN FRONT OF US AND
THAT WE'VE GOT A LOT
OF EXISTING OFFICE SPACE HERE
EXISTING LEASED HIGH QUALITY
OFFICE SPACE.
SO THAT ALLOWS US TO DO IS TO
CREATE AN ENVIRONMENT THAT IS
BUSY DURING THE DAY AND BUSY AT
NIGHT AND THAT IS KEY TO YOUR
COMMERCIAL TENANT SUCCESS.
AND SO YOU TALK ABOUT DYNAMIC
GROUND FLOOR RETAIL
ENTERTAINMENT, ALL OF THE SORT
OF COMMERCIAL SERVICES THAT
THAT IS ABSOLUTELY VITAL TO
THEIR SUCCESS ORGANIZED AROUND
THAT CENTRAL BEHIND THAT THAT
CENTRAL OPEN SPACE THAT WE
TALKED ABOUT AND TRYING TO FIND
WAYS IN WHICH WE WERE
CONTROLLING THE STREET.
SO WE'RE CONTROLLING BOTH SIDES
OF THE STREET STREET TREES,
PARKING SPOTS, THAT SORT
OF THING, BUT ALSO MAKING SURE
WE ARE INTEGRATING THE EXISTING
BUILDINGS AS WELL WHICH WEREN'T
DESIGNED WITH SOME OF THOSE
THINGS IN MIND.
AND SO SOME OF THE SMALLER
BUILDINGS IN THE MIDDLE ARE
MEANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
BREAKING DOWN THE SCALE SO THAT
ALL OF THESE BUILDINGS FEEL
LIKE THEY'RE A PART
OF SOMETHING BIGGER.
THIS IS AN EARLY RENDER FOR
THAT THAT CENTRAL OPEN SPACE
AND THEY SAY EARLY BECAUSE
THERE'S NOT NEARLY ENOUGH GREEN
IN IT DRIVES ME NUTS EVERY TIME
I SEE IT.
HOWEVER, THERE IS SOMETHING
REALLY, REALLY IMPORTANT IN
THIS IMAGE THAT I THINK I WANT
TO MAKE SURE I GET ACROSS AND
THAT IS THAT THIS PLACE AND
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU GET HERE
NEEDS TO FEEL LIKE WE'VE SOFTEN
THE EDGES SO THAT THE
PEDESTRIAN FEELS PRIMARY AND
THE CAR FEELS SEPARATE.
WE CAN'T IGNORE THE FACT THAT
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO HAVE CARS
HERE BUT THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT
THEY HAVE TO RULE THE STREETS.
AND SO WE'VE BEEN LOOKING AT
WAYS IN WHICH ASPHALT BECOMES
PAVING RIGHT WHERE THERE AREN'T
CURB LINES BUT RATHER BOLLARDS.
THE IDEA THAT FOR CERTAIN
EVENTS WE COULD SHUT THE
STREETS DOWN COMPLETELY AND YET
THE SERVICEABILITY OF THE
NEIGHBORHOOD WOULD BE
MAINTAINED AND WHICH IS A PART
OF WHAT THAT GRID OF STREETS
THAT WERE CREATED IS REALLY,
REALLY IMPORTANT AND THE
LOCATION OF THE ENTRANCES AND
EXITS TO THOSE GARAGES BECOME
VITAL THAT THERE ARE SOME
LESSONS THAT QUITE FRANKLY
WE'VE LEARNED THE HARD WAY AT
BRIDGE PARK THAT WE BRING HERE
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE CAN DO IT
A LITTLE BIT BETTER EVERY TIME
.
THESE ARE ALL EXAMPLES OF THE
THE OPEN SPACES THAT I'M
TALKING ABOUT.
AND SO YOU CAN SEE SOME
OF THESE THEY'RE THEY'RE BIG
GRAND.
THE IDEA IS THAT WHETHER YOU
LIVE THERE OR NOT, YOU STILL
FEEL LIKE YOUR HOME THERE.
BUT THEN THERE ARE OTHER SPACES
AND SOME OF THEM ELEVATED WHERE
THESE BECOME AMENITIES FOR THE
RESIDENTS THEMSELVES AND THEY
FEEL LIKE THEY HAVE SOMETHING
SPECIAL AS WELL.
THESE ARE THE TYPES OF SPACES
THAT WE WILL DEFINE IF THEY GET
USED THAT DEFINE SUCCESS FOR US
BECAUSE THAT IT'S THAT SORT
OF DYNAMIC ATMOSPHERE OR THAT
WOULD LOU.
AND DONNA, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
EARLIER THAT WE FOUND A
MULTITUDE OF PLACES THAT WE
DEVELOPED IS THAT IF YOU CAN
CREATE THAT SENSE OF PLACE IT
SORT OF SOLVES A LOT OF OTHER
ISSUES FOR YOU.
THIS IS THESE ARE A COUPLE
IMAGES OF BRIDGE PARK.
SO OUR WE HAVE AN EVENTS TEAM
THAT I'D LIKE TO YOU KNOW, I
LEAD OUR DEVELOPMENT GROUP AND
YET OUR EVENTS GROUP I SWEAR
HAS MORE EMPLOYEES THAN THAN MY
GROUP DOES.
BUT THEY'RE VITAL TO THE
SUCCESS OF OUR PLACES.
THESE ARE TWO OF OUR LARGER
EVENTS THAT WE AT BRIDGE PARK
AND IN BOTH CASES WE SHUT THE
WHOLE PLACE DOWN THE LONG SHORE
STREET FOR ABOUT TWO THOUSAND
FEET IS COMPLETELY SHUT DOWN.
IT'S THE HEART OF OUR
NEIGHBORHOOD, THE ONE ON THE
LEFT FOR FEST'S WE ARE WE ARE
BLESSED THAT THERE'S THE
MEMORIAL TOURNAMENT PGA
TOURNAMENT HAPPENS JUST
DOWN
THE ROAD FROM US AND SO THIS IS
ACTUALLY A MUSIC EVENT THAT WE
DO
IN CONCERT WITH THEIR
ORGANIZATION.
THIS ONE GETS ABOUT THOUSAND
FOLKS.
IT'S THE WEEKEND BEFORE THE
TOURNAMENT AND THEN THE DUBLIN
MARKET WHICH IS EVERY SINGLE
SATURDAY WE DO FOR THE ENTIRE
SUMMER SOME SPRING, SUMMER,
FALL AND AGAIN THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE COME TO THIS.
AND THE OTHER THING THAT'S
REALLY THIS IS KIND OF JUST
SPECIAL ABOUT THIS TO ME.
BUT I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
HERE.
THESE STARTED TEN YEARS AGO AS
AN IDEA THAT A COUPLE OF US HAD
TO SAY THERE'S NO REASON WHY WE
CAN'T DO THIS IF WE BUILT THIS
BASE RIGHT.
IF WE DESIGN THE SPACE RIGHT.
THESE SORTS OF THINGS SHOULD BE
SUCCESS FOR AND DEAR FRIEND
OF MINE IS NO LONGER WITH US.
YOU KNOW, THESE WERE HIS
BRAINCHILD AND THEY WORKED AND
SO WE REALLY THINK THAT THIS
CAN WORK HERE AS WELL.
LASTLY, I WANTED TO TOUCH A
LITTLE BIT ON FAZING YOU KNOW
THESE PHASE ONE THROUGH FIVE I
WOULD SAY THIS IS MORE OF A
ROLLING PROJECT.
THE INTENTION IS NOT TO BUILD
ONE AND THEN WAIT FOR THE OTHER
BUT RATHER THAT THESE ARE
CONTINUING TO COME ONLINE.
WE UNDERSTAND CRITICAL MASS IS
IMPORTANT HERE MEANING LIKE IF
YOU ARE TRYING TO OPEN AN
APARTMENT ON THIS SIDE OF THE
STREET AND ON THIS SIDE OF THE
STREET YOU'VE STILL GOT A LOT
OF CONSTRUCTION THAT'S NOT
REALLY GOOD FOR ANYBODY BUT
THERE ARE EXISTING PARKING LOTS
IN PLACE AND AN EXISTING
PARKING GARAGE IN PLACE THAT WE
HAVE GOT TO THREAD CAREFULLY
THROUGH AS WE REDEVELOP THIS
LAND TO MAKE SURE THAT WE ARE
NOT SHORTCHANGING THE FOLKS
THAT ALREADY CALL THIS THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD HOME AT LEAST AS
FAR AS WORK IS CONCERNED.
SO WITH THAT I'M GOING TO TURN
IT OVER TO MY FRIEND JEREMIAH.
I GET TO I THINK I GET TO HAVE
A LOT MORE FUN AND THEN I
CREATE ALL OF THESE THESE IDEAS
ALL OF THESE THESE IDEAS.
HE'S REALLY, REALLY GOOD AT
WORKING WITH GROUPS OF CITIES
LIKE THIS AND CONSULTING TEAMS
LIKE OURS TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
MAKE THIS REALITY.
SO WITH THAT I WILL GIVE IT TO
JEREMIAH ON THANKSGIVING.
THANK YOU FOR INVITING US TODAY
.
AGAIN, MY NAME IS JEREMIAH
THOMAS.
I'M CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER
CRAWFORD HOYING AND PRIOR TO
JOINING CRAWFORD HOYING I'D
BEEN WORKING ON PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIPS FOR SEVEN OR EIGHT
YEARS BEFORE STARTING TO PUT
STUFF ONLINE IN-HOUSE WITH THE
TEAM AND AS RUSS SAID, WHAT WE
TRY TO DO IS TAKE THESE
BEAUTIFUL IDEAS AND THESE THESE
CONCEPTS OF CREATING A VIBRANT
COMMUNITY AND MAKING THEM REAL
AND MAKING THE REAL NOT JUST
FOR US BUT FOR THE COMMUNITIES
THAT WE LIVE IN.
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE PRIDE OURSELVES ON AS A
DEVELOPMENT TEAM, AS A COMPANY
AND THAT WE FEEL LIKE WE FOUND
A REAL KINDRED SPIRIT WITH JEFF
HALMAN IN THE OXFORD TEAM WITH
IS THAT WHAT WE BUILD HAS TO BE
AUTHENTIC TO THE COMMUNITIES
THAT WE'RE BUILDING IT IN?
ONE THING I CAN PROMISE YOU IS
THAT ARBER S WILL NOT BE BRIDGE
PARK BUT IT WILL NOT BE BRIDGE
PARK IN ALL THE WAYS THAT YOU
WANT IT TO NOT BE BRIDGE PARK
IT WILL BE OF THIS COMMUNITY.
IT WILL BE FOR THIS COMMUNITY
AND IT WILL BE SOMETHING THE
COMMUNITY CAN BE PROUD OF AND
CALL ITS OWN AND THAT'S WHAT WE
HOPE TO BRING TO LIFE FOR AMONG
THE THINGS THAT IS VERY
IMPORTANT TO US AND THAT WE
UNDERSTAND IS VERY IMPORTANT TO
THE CITY IN THE COMMUNITY HERE
AT LARGE IS THE CONCEPT
OF ECONOMIC DIVERSITY WITHIN
OUR COMMUNITIES.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'VE
STRIVEN FOR AT OUR OTHER
DEVELOPMENTS.
IT MAKES FOR A HEALTHIER
DEVELOPMENT IF THERE'S ECONOMIC
DIVERSITY WITHIN THE HOUSING
HOUSING ITSELF IS A NEED THAT
WE KNOW WITHIN OUR ANN ARBOR
AND IS ONE THAT WE'RE COMMITTED
TO PROVIDING.
BUT WE'VE ALSO BEEN WORKING
VERY CLOSELY WITH JENNIFER HALL
AT THE ANN ARBOR HOUSING
COMMISSION TO WORK ON A PLAN
THAT ALLOWS US TO BRING SOME
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
AND IF YOU LOOK TO THE TOP
RIGHT OF THE DIAGRAM IN THIS
PARTICULAR SITE PLAN THIS IS A
SITE PADDS THAT WE'VE DONE SOME
SCHEMATIC PLANNING FOR THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMMISSION
FOR BRINGING SOME AFFORDABLE
HOUSING TO THE FRONT END
OF THIS PROJECT AND I THINK
THAT'S AN IMPORTANT COMPONENT
OF ONE OF THE PUBLIC BENEFITS
THAT WE'RE HOPING TO BRING HERE
AND I THINK MAYBE A LITTLE
UNIQUE TO THIS DEVELOPMENT
VERSUS SOME OTHERS WE'RE REALLY
WORKING ON ENSURING THAT
THERE'S A DELIVERY OF REAL
UNITS TO SERVE A REAL NEED IN
THE COMMUNITY AND TO DO SO NOT
PRO-RATA AS WE BUILD THE
DEVELOPMENT BUT HOPEFULLY TO
THE FRONT END OF THIS PROJECT
THAT WE'RE ABLE TO WORK THROUGH
WITH WITH JENNIFER AND HER
TEAM.
I DON'T WANT TO SPEAK FOR
JENNIFER AND I AM GOING TO HOP
BACK UP AFTER SHE GIVES A
LITTLE BIT MORE DETAIL ON THE
DEAL THAT WE'RE WORKING ON AND
FRAME UP A LITTLE BIT OF THE
ASK AND THEN INVITE MARTY UP TO
TALK ABOUT THE CITY'S
PERSPECTIVE AND DILIGENCE ON
THAT AND I'LL BE AVAILABLE FOR
QUESTIONS LATER.
SO JENNIFER
, GOOD EVENING.
I'M HERE TO STAY IN MY LANE AND
TALK ABOUT AFFORDABLE HOUSING
TONIGHT.
YOU'VE PROBABLY NEVER HEARD
THIS DEVELOPMENT IS VERY
DIFFICULT, RISKY AND EXPENSIVE.
IT'S COMPLEX AND AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IS THAT MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT.
I KNOW YOU'VE NEVER HEARD THIS
EITHER BUT DEVELOPING IN ANN
ARBOR IS EVEN MORE EXPENSIVE
AND DIFFICULT THAN MOST OTHER
COMMUNITIES.
CONSEQUENTLY, WHENEVER THERE'S
AN OPPORTUNITY TO DEVELOP A
SIGNIFICANT NUMBER
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE
CITY VANOVER IT IS VALUABLE AND
IT'S WORTHY OF SUPPORTING.
AND SO THAT'S WHAT I'D LIKE TO
TALK ABOUT.
AS HAS BEEN MENTIONED, IRS IS
PROPOSING TO DEVELOP ABOUT A
THOUSAND HOUSING UNITS AND
APPROXIMATELY 200 OF THOSE WILL
BE AFFORDABLE.
HOUSING COMMISSION IS WORKING
WITH CITY STAFF AND THE
OVERSELLS TEAM TO ENSURE THAT
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS WELL
CONSTRUCTED, SUSTAINABLE AND
AFFORDABLE TO HOUSEHOLDS AT 60
PERCENT OF AIMI OR LESS WHICH
THIS YEAR IS ROUGHLY AT THE
HIGH END.
FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR ONE
PERSON, SEVENTY TWO THOUSAND
DOLLARS FOR A FOUR PERSON
HOUSEHOLD THAT'S AT THE UPPER
CITIES TRIED MANY DIFFERENT
STRATEGIES TO INCREASE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUILT BY
MARKET RATE DEVELOPERS
PRIMARILY THROUGH ZONING AND
BROWNFIELD TIF POLICIES SINCE
THE 1990S AND I'VE BEEN HERE
THAT WHOLE ENTIRE TIME THE
TOTAL NUMBER OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND RENTAL AND OWNER
UNITS DEVELOPED BY MARKET RATE
DEVELOPERS THAT STILL HAVE CITY
DEED RESTRICTIONS ON THEM IS
ABOUT 50 UNITS SO THAT'S OVER
40 YEARS.
I PERSONALLY HAVE BEEN AN
ADVOCATE FOR MANY OF THOSE
POLICIES AND STRATEGIES OVER
THE YEARS BUT IT WASN'T UNTIL I
BECAME THE DIRECTOR OF THE
HOUSING COMMISSION AND WE BOTH
OWN AND MANAGE UNITS AS WELL AS
WORK WITH PRIVATE DEVELOPERS
WITH OUR VOUCHER PROGRAM THAT I
REALIZED WE AS THE CITY WE'RE
TRYING TO MAKE A SQUARE PEG FIT
INTO A ROUND HOLE BY REQUIRING
MARKET RATE DEVELOPERS TO BUILD
OUR AFFORDABLE HOUSING WITHIN
THEIR MARKET RATE UNITS.
WHICH IS WHY FOLKS HAVE HEARD
ME TALK ABOUT THE FACT THAT
ENCOURAGE CASH IN LIEU AS
OPPOSED TO BUILDING UNITS IN
MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENTS AND
THAT WE ARE MISSION ORIENTED
DEVELOPERS CAN DEVELOP OWN AND
MANAGE THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
OURSELVES IS REQUESTING
BROWNFIELD FINANCING TO REQUIRE
THEM OVER THE COURSE OF THEIR
ENTIRE DEVELOPMENT TO BUILD
EITHER 15 PERCENT OF AFFORDABLE
UNITS WHICH IS ABOUT A HUNDRED
AND FIFTY UNITS OR PROVIDE A
CASH IN LIEU CONTRIBUTION
OF ROUGHLY 10 MILLION DOLLARS
OVER THE ENTIRETY OF THE
PROJECT WE ARE PROPOSING AN
ALTERNATIVE THAT IS MORE
BENEFICIAL I THINK TO CITY
RESIDENTS.
THE ARBOR SELF DEVELOPMENT TEAM
IS PRESENTING A INCREDIBLE
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THEIR EXPERTIZE IN
THE FINANCIAL LEVERAGE THAT
THEY'RE ABLE TO DO THE AS A
MARKET RATE DEVELOPER TO BUILD
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING THAT
WILL BE OWNED BY AND MANAGED BY
A MISSION BASED ENTITY WHICH IS
THE HOUSING COMMISSION TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF OUR EXPERTIZE
OF ACTUALLY MANAGING THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WE ARE
TARGETING FOR THESE UNITS TO BE
DELIVERED AS PART OF THE FIRST
PHASE OF THE PHASE PHASE
DEVELOPMENT.
THAT MEANS THAT WE WILL HAVE
ACTUAL UNITS TO HELP WITH OUR
HOUSING BOTH SOONER THAT WE
WOULD HAVE IF THEY DELIVERED
THEM AS 15 PERCENT OF EACH
PHASE AS WELL AS SOONER THAN IF
WE HAD THEM PROVIDE A FEE IN
LIEU.
THAT THEN COMES AS EACH PHASE
IS COMPLETED AND THEN THE FUNDS
WOULD GO TO AN ENTITY TO
DEVELOP.
SO THAT TAKES A MUCH LONGER
TIME TO ACTUALLY GET THE UNITS
UP AND RUNNING.
IN ADDITION, THERE ARE A LOT
OF ECONOMIES OF SCALE TO
DEVELOP A SITE THIS LARGE.
SO WHEN YOU'RE DOING A THOUSAND
UNITS VERSUS 50 UNITS YOU CAN
SPREAD SOME COST ACROSS THOSE
ALL THOSE UNITS AND IT BRINGS
THE PER UNIT COST DOWN ON THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THESE TWO HUNDRED UNITS WILL
NOT BE TYPICAL HOUSING
COMMISSION APARTMENTS AS WE
WILL NOT BE SETTING ASIDE UNITS
FOR HOMELESS HOUSEHOLDS BECAUSE
THAT REQUIRES A MUCH DEEPER
SUBSIDY THAT WE DON'T HAVE
AVAILABLE RIGHT NOW.
HOWEVER, THE RENTS WILL BE
LOWER THAN MARKET RATE AND THEY
WILL NOT COME WITH PROJECT
BASED VOUCHERS LIKE OUR OTHER
PROPERTIES.
BUT THEY WILL BE AVAILABLE TO
PEOPLE WHO HAVE TENANT BASED
VOUCHERS IF THEY APPLY, PEOPLE
WITH SPECIAL NEEDS WILL BE
WELCOME BECAUSE WE ARE IN THE
BUSINESS OF SCREENING PEOPLE IN
NOT SCREENING PEOPLE OUT.
THE MAJORITY OF RENTERS WILL BE
PEOPLE WHO ARE WORKING LIKELY
IN THE FORTY TO SEVENTY
THOUSAND DOLLAR RANGE.
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING WILL BE
RESTRICTED LIKE ALL OF OUR
OTHER AFFORDABLE HOUSING TO
MAKE SURE IT HAS LONG TERM
AFFORDABILITY.
THE HOUSING COMMISSION WILL
WORK CLOSELY WITH THE IRS TEAM
ON THE ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN,
THE ACCESSIBILITY OF THE UNITS
AND THE COMMON AREAS AS WELL AS
THE SUSTAINABILITY OF THE
OPERATIONS
.
IT WILL HAVE SIMILAR INTERIOR
AND EXTERIOR FINISHES AS THE
MARKET RATE HOUSING SO IT
BLENDS INTO THE DEVELOPMENT.
THE HOUSING COMMISSION IS ALSO
WORKING CLOSELY WITH THE IRS
TEAM TO SECURE LONG TERM
FINANCING BECAUSE THE HOUSING
COMMISSION WILL BE A QUIRING
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING FROM THE
DEVELOPER AFTER IT IS BUILT AND
WE WILL TO NEED TO ASSUME THAT
FINANCING OURSELF IS TAKING ON
A SIGNIFICANT FINANCIAL RISK
WITH GUARANTEES RELATED TO THE
CONSTRUCTION OF FINANCING AND
THEY WILL OVERSEE AND MANAGE
THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS IN THE
SAME WAY THAT THE HOUSING
COMMISSION HIRES A DEVELOPER AT
OUR OTHER DEVELOPMENT SITES
THAT WE HAVE DEVELOPED.
IT'S WORTH REPEATING THAT OUR S
WILL BUILD MORE THAN THE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED
APARTMENTS UNDER THE BROWNFIELD
TIF POLICY OF ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY UNITS WITH A GOAL
OF ABOUT AN ADDITIONAL FIFTY
WHICH BY THEMSELVES THOSE FIFTY
UNITS WILL COST APPROXIMATELY
12 MILLION DOLLARS FOR THE
DEVELOPER TO DELIVER TO THE
HOUSING COMMISSION.
WE WILL BE PARTNERS THROUGHOUT
THE PROCESS AND THEN THE
HOUSING COMMISSION WILL TAKE
OWNERSHIP AFTER EVERYTHING'S
BUILT AND IS READY FOR
OCCUPANCY LIKE OTHER HOUSING
COMMISSION PROJECTS, THE
HOUSING COMMISSION WILL
LEVERAGE LOCAL VILLAGE FUNDS BY
MAXIMIZING NONLOCAL FUNDS WHICH
WILL REQUIRE US TO COMPLY WITH
THOSE FUNDING SOURCES ON THE
UNDERWRITING SIDE AND ONGOING
MONITORING.
THEREBY THE HOUSING COMMISSION
WILL NEED THE CITY TO BOND FOR
THE EQUITY PORTION REQUIRED FOR
A MORTGAGE WHICH IS CURRENTLY
ESTIMATED AT ROUGHLY EIGHT TO
12 MILLION DOLLARS.
IT WILL BE VERY SIMILAR TO WHAT
WE DID AT CATHERINE STREET
WHERE WE DID A NINE MILLION
DOLLAR BOND AND THE FUTURE
REPAYMENT WILL COME FROM ANNUAL
MILEAGE REVENUE.
THE IRS TEAM WILL MAKE THEIR
FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING THROUGH A
COMBINATION OF THE ASSUMPTION
OF THE RISK, THE FINANCIAL
GUARANTEES, THE FOREGONE PROFIT
AND THE COMBINATION OF WHICH WE
ESTIMATE TO BE FAR NORTH OF THE
TEN MILLION DOLLARS IT WOULD
HAVE OTHERWISE BEEN AS A CASH
VALUE CONTRIBUTION THROUGH THE
BROWNFIELD TYPE PROGRAM AS IT
RELATES TO THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING I STAND BEHIND THE
DEVELOPMENT THAT OUR HEALTH IS
PRESENTING AND THEIR COMMITMENT
AND WILLINGNESS TO PARTNER WITH
THE HOUSING COMMISSION IN THE
CITY.
THANK YOU
.
THANK YOU JENNIFER.
SO PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
IS TURNING AROUND A LOT AND I
THINK JENNIFER TALKED A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT PART OF OUR VISION
FOR THE PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP LOOKS LIKE HERE AT
AND IN THIS CASE IT'S OUR
ABILITY TO HELP LEVERAGE THE
SITE AT LARGE AND JUST THE
SCALE AND THE SCOPE THIS
PROJECT TO DELIVER AFFORDABLE
UNITS MORE CHEAPLY THAN THEY
OTHERWISE COULD BE MORE
EFFICIENTLY LARGER NUMBERS
EARLIER BUT THE REALITY IS FOR
A PROJECT LIKE THIS AND MILTON
TALKED ABOUT IT EARLIER FOR
SOMETHING OF THIS SCALE TO
HAPPEN THERE HAS TO BE
COORDINATION BETWEEN LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AND THE PRIVATE
DEVELOPER AND IT HAS TO BE A
WIN WIN SITUATION WHERE
EVERYBODY LEAVES FEELING LIKE
THEY'RE GETTING OUT OF IT.
WHAT WHAT WHAT THE WHAT WHAT
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR AND
SPECIFICALLY WHAT WE'RE ALL
LOOKING FOR IS, YOU KNOW, THIS
VIBRANT WALKABLE COMMUNITY WITH
THESE PUBLIC AMENITIES WE HEARD
YOU TALK ABOUT EARLIER AND IN
THIS CONCEPT OF AN
ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT WHERE
PEOPLE WANT TO BE AND THAT IS
REALLY A COMMITMENT THAT WE'RE
MAKING TO THE CITY THAT WE WE
WANT TO BUILD A PLACE THAT
WE'RE ALL PROUD OF .
WE WANT TO BUILD A PLACE THAT'S
ICONIC.
WE WANT TO BUILD A PLACE THAT
IS DOES JUSTICE TO THE SOUTHERN
ENTRANCE TO THE CITY AND THAT
IS ANOTHER NODE FOR DENSITY IN
ADDITION TO THE BEAUTIFUL
DOWNTOWN THAT ANN ARBOR ALREADY
HAS AND IT SERVES AS AN
INSPIRATION FOR US TO TO BUILD
ON TO I THINK THE OUR
COMMITMENT TO BUILD THOSE
BEAUTIFUL SPACES SIMPLY IS
SUPPORTED BY STANDARD CITY
SUPPORTED INFRASTRUCTURE AND I
THINK THE MOST NATURAL PLACE
FOR THAT FIT IN THIS INSTANCE
AND MANY OF YOU ARE ALREADY
AWARE IS IN OUR OPINION IS FOR
THE PARKING GARAGES, THE
CONSTRUCTION OWNERSHIP AND
MANAGEMENT OF THOSE PARKING
GARAGES LONG TERM THERE'S ALL
KINDS OF REASONS WHY PARKING IS
A HEALTHY, HEALTHY THING FOR A
CITY AND A MUNICIPALITY TO
CONTROL.
BUT THERE'S ALSO A REALITY THAT
WE'RE IN A SHIFTING ENVIRONMENT
OF PARKING NEEDS AND WE WANT TO
WE WANT TO SUPPORT A PHASING
STRUCTURE IN THAT SHIFTING
ENVIRONMENT THAT ENSURES TWO
THINGS.
ONE IS THAT AS WE LOOK TO THE
BROWNFIELD TIF AS A SOURCE
OF REPAYMENT FOR THE COST
OF CONSTRUCTING THESE PARKING
GARAGES THAT THE PRIVATE
IMPROVEMENTS THAT ARE BEING
CONSTRUCTED ALONGSIDE THOSE
PARKING GARAGES ARE DELIVERED
AT THE SAME PACE AS ARE
REQUIRED TO GENERATE THE TIF
PROCEEDS THAT WILL BE THAT
FINANCING SOURCE.
THE SECOND IS AND THIS HAS BEEN
AN EXPERIENCE THAT WE'VE HAD AT
MOST OF OUR OTHER MULTIPHASE
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS.
YOU HAVE TO BUILD THE MOST
PARKING IN THE FIRST PLACE AND
YOU LEARN THAT YOU CAN BE MORE
CREATIVE WITH SHARED PARKING
SOLUTIONS AS YOU GO ALONG AND
WE NEVER WANT TO OVERBUILD
PARKING ONE FOR THE PUBLIC GOOD
BUT THEN TO JUST SIMPLY IT'S AN
EFFICIENT USE OF SPACE AND AND
WE'D LIKE TO SEE MORE HOUSING
AND MORE VIBRANCY AND MORE
ENTERTAINMENT AND MORE OPEN
SPACES CREATED AS WE GO ALONG.
AND SO OUR FAZING PLAN IS BASED
ON OUR ASSUMPTION THAT EACH
PHASE OF THIS DEVELOPMENT WILL
HAVE TO SELL THE PARKING WILL
HAVE TO BE SELF SUPPORTED FOR
THOSE PHASES AND THAT IT WILL
HAVE TO BE TARGETED FOR THE
PHASE AS WE MOVE ALONG SO THAT
WE'RE NEVER BUILDING MORE THAN
NECESSARY AND NEVER
OVERBUILDING IT FROM A
FINANCIAL STANDPOINT.
>> THE FINAL THING I'LL SAY
THAT WE'RE ABSOLUTELY COMMITTED
TO DO IS WE WILL GUARANTEE THE
COMPLETION OF THE PRIVATE
IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED TO
SUPPORT THE TIF REVENUE IN
ORDER TO IN ORDER TO GENERATE
THE PROCEEDS FOR CONSTRUCTING
THE PARKING GARAGES.
AND WE ABSOLUTELY RECOGNIZE
THAT THE CITY IS GOING TO BE
LOOKING FOR SOME BACKSTOPS TO
MAKE SURE THAT THERE'S ADEQUATE
TIF REVENUE AND WE'RE COMMITTED
TO MAKE SURE THAT THE FINANCING
STRUCTURES ARE SOUND FOR THE
CITY.
AGAIN, IF THIS IF THIS LONG
TERM PARTNERSHIP DOESN'T WORK
FOR BOTH THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
AND FOREVER SOUTH, THEN WE WILL
NOT FEEL LIKE WE'VE MET OUR
COMMITMENT HERE.
A COUPLE OF QUICK POINTS BEFORE
HANDING IT OFF TO MARTY TO TALK
ABOUT THE CITY'S DILIGENCE
PROCESS AND AND THE FINANCING
MORE GENERALLY.
ONE IS JUST A QUICK
ILLUSTRATION HERE OF HOW WE
HAVE ALREADY DESIGNED A PARKING
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE THINK IS
AN EFFICIENT PARKING PLAN
CURRENTLY THE SITE IF YOU LOOK
AT THE EXISTING PARKING DECK
AND THE EXISTING SURFACE
PARKING SPACES FOR ALMOST
400000 SQUARE FEET
OF COMMERCIAL SPACE, THERE ARE,
YOU KNOW, 1500 SPACES THREE
POINT EIGHT ONE ALMOST FOUR
FOUR SPACES FOUR THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET AFTER COMPLETION
OF ALL OF THE PHASES AS
CURRENTLY DESIGNED WE'RE
LOOKING ABOUT TWENTY SIX
HUNDRED SPACES BUT THOSE TWENTY
SIX HUNDRED SPACES ARE GOING TO
SERVE US ALMOST TWO POINT FIVE
MILLION TOTAL SQUARE FEET.
THAT BRINGS THE PARKING RATIO
DOWN TO YOU KNOW, ABOUT ONE PER
THOUSAND SQUARE FOOTAGE BASIS.
AND SO WHILE WE ARE BUILDING
ADDITIONAL PARKING WHILE WE ARE
BUILDING PARKING TO SUPPORT
THIS DENSER ENVIRONMENT THAT I
THINK WE ALL WANT IN TO SUPPORT
ALL THE ADDITIONAL HOUSING THAT
WE WANT, THE DESIGN IS MEANT TO
BE AS PARKING EFFICIENT AS
POSSIBLE.
PART OF THE REASON THAT WE'RE
ABLE TO DO THIS, BY THE WAY, IS
BECAUSE WE HAVE EXISTING OFFICE
USE THAT IS GOING TO SUPPORT A
FAIR AMOUNT OF THESE SPACES AND
WHAT WE'VE LEARNED THROUGH
THESE MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS IS
THAT WE'RE ABLE TO PLAN OUR
PARKING IN A VERY EFFICIENT AND
SHARED MANNER.
OFFICE USERS AND RESTAURANT
USERS HAVE SOME OVERLAP DURING
TIMES OF DAY.
WE'RE BOTH NEED PARKING BUT
TYPICALLY OFFICE USERS ARE
DAYTIME USERS, RESTAURANT USERS
AND RESIDENTIAL USERS AND
NIGHTTIME USERS AS OUR HOTEL
USERS.
AND SO WE THINK THAT WE'RE
GOING TO BE ABLE TO SHARE
SPACES IN A WAY THAT'S AN
EFFICIENT USE OF THE SPACE AND
EFFICIENT USE OF THE PARKING
GARAGES, REDUCE THE COST TO THE
CITY, REDUCE THE FOOTPRINTS
OF THESE PARKING GARAGES,
INCREASE THE AMOUNT OF VIBRANCY
WE'RE ABLE TO CREATE WITH THE
REST OF DEVELOPMENT.
>> THE OTHER THING WORTH NOTING
IS SOME OF THESE TRANSPORTATION
STATS AS IT RELATES TO THE
PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE THAT DRIVE
ALONE TO WORK, WHETHER IT BE TO
DOWNTOWN AND THIS SHOWS THE
STATS WHAT THE COMMERCIAL
SQUARE FOOTAGE IS DOWNTOWN AND
THEN THE PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE
WHO DRIVE ALONE TO WORK TO THE
SOUTH SIDE AND THE RELATIVE
SIZE OF THE COMMERCIAL SQUARE
FOOTAGE ON THE SOUTH SIDE RIGHT
NOW DWARFS THE POPULATION IN
PARTICULARLY IF YOU COMPARE IT
TO THE POPULATION OF DOWNTOWN
COMPARED THE COMMERCIAL SQUARE
FOOTAGE DOWNTOWN.
WHAT THIS TELLS US IS THAT
THERE'S ROOM FOR A DENSER NODE
ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF THE CITY
ALLOWING HOUSING TO BE CLOSER
TO THE JOBS THAT ARE ALREADY ON
THE SOUTH SIDE OF THE CITY AND
HOPEFULLY ALLOWING FEWER PEOPLE
TO DRIVE ALONE TO WORK,
ALLOWING MORE PEOPLE TO ACCESS
WORK EITHER THROUGH EITHER
THROUGH WALKWAYS
AND BIKE PATHS
OR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND IN
REGARDLESS PROVIDING HOUSING.
THAT WOULD BE A SHORTER DRIVE
TO WORK NONETHELESS AND SO ALL
OF THIS IS A IS REALLY A
HANDOFF OVER TO MARTY TO SAY,
YOU KNOW, WE'VE PUT A LOT
OF THOUGHT INTO AN EFFICIENT
DEVELOPMENT.
WE'RE VERY THOUGHTFUL ABOUT
USING THE DOLLARS WISELY BOTH
OUR OWN AND AND THE TIF DOLLARS
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT AND
WE'RE VERY THOUGHTFUL ABOUT
PUTTING IN DEVELOPMENT THAT
WILL TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE
THINGS THAT LOU AND DONNA WERE
TALKING ABOUT EARLIER.
THAT SENSE OF PLACEMAKING IS
IMPORTANT.
IT'S NOT JUST IMPORTANT TO
YOUNG PROFESSIONALS.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO MOST PEOPLE
THAT WANT TO LIVE IN WALKABLE
URBAN ENVIRONMENTS AND YOU
KNOW, OUR EXPERIENCE IN OUR
OTHER DEVELOPMENTS BRIDGE PARK
BEING A PRIME EXAMPLE OF IT WAS
ACTUALLY THAT OUR EARLIEST
STAGE ADOPTERS TO BRIDGE PARK
WERE EMPTY NESTERS.
THE FIRST COUPLE THAT MOVED IN
THE BRIDGE PARK WAS A COUPLE
OF RETIREES THAT WERE I THINK
77 IN 74 YEARS OLD AT THE TIME.
THOSE WERE FIRST RESIDENTS AND
EVEN TODAY WHAT WE'VE SEEN
BECAUSE WE'VE CREATED AN
ENVIRONMENT WHERE PEOPLE WANT
TO BE THAT ABOUT A THIRD OF OUR
RESIDENTS ARE EMPTY NESTERS.
ABOUT A THIRD OF OUR RESIDENTS
ARE YOUNG PROFESSIONALS SAY
BETWEEN THE AGES OF 24 AND 35
AND THEN THE OTHER THIRD MAKES
UP THE MIDDLE BETWEEN THOSE
YOUNG PROFESSIONALS AND THOSE
EMPTY NESTERS.
IF YOU BUILD SOMETHING GREAT,
EVERYBODY WANTS TO BE THERE AND
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE HOPING TO DO
AND WE'RE LOOKING FORWARD TO
DOING THAT WITH YOUR SUPPORT
AND WITH THE SUPPORT OF STAFF.
WITH THAT I'LL TURN IT OVER TO
MARTY
.
>> I DIDN'T MEAN TO STEAL THAT
FROM
BERNIE
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY ROLE THIS EVENING IS TO
EXPLAIN THE DUE DILIGENCE
PROCESS THE CITY HAS UNDERTAKEN
TO DATE FOR THIS PARTICULAR
DEVELOPMENT.
TO BE CLEAR, OUR DUE DILIGENCE
HAS ONLY JUST BEGUN AND WE HAVE
ADDITIONAL WORK TO DO IN THIS
AREA.
BUT BEFORE I BEGIN I FIRST WANT
TO PROVIDE A BRIEF OVERVIEW OR
EXPLANATION OF A FUNDING
MECHANISM YOU'VE HEARD ABOUT
TONIGHT WHICH IS THE BROWNFIELD
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING TOOL
FOR PURPOSES OF EDUCATING THE
PUBLIC AND ALSO REMINDING US
OF ALL OF HOW THAT PROCESS
WORKS.
THE BROWNFIELD HIF IS A FUNDING
TOOL THAT COVERS ADDITIONAL
COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
REDEVELOPING A BROWNFIELD
PROPERTY AND THIS PARTICULAR
PROJECT THE BROWNFIELD COMES
INTO PLACE WHEN WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THE GAS STATION THAT IS
ON THE SITE.
THE INCREASE IN THE VALUE
RESULTED IN INCREASE THE
INCREASE IN VALUE DUE TO THE
THE PROJECT RESULTED IN AN
INCREASE IN PROPERTY TAX PAID
TO THE TAXING AUTHORITIES WHICH
WE CALL THE INCREMENT AND WHEN
I SAY TAXING AUTHORITIES,
THAT'S ALL THE TAXING
AUTHORITIES, NOT JUST THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
THAT INCREMENT IS CAPTURED BY
THE TAXING AUTHORITY WHICH IN
THIS CASE IS WASHTENAW COUNTY
WHO THEN DISPERSED AND USES
THAT MONEY TO REIMBURSE
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES IN THE
BROWNFIELD PLAN.
THE BROWNFIELD ACTIVITIES ARE
ELIGIBLE FOR REIMBURSEMENT ARE
DEFINED IN THE BROWNFIELD
REDEVELOPMENT FINANCING ACT AND
REQUIRE BOTH LOCAL APPROVAL BY
THE CITY AND THE COUNTY ONCE
THE COSTS OF THE ACTUAL PROJECT
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES HAVE BEEN
REIMBURSED, THE TAXING
AUTHORITIES THEN CAN COLLECT
THE FULL VALUE OF THE INCREASE
IN THE TAX REVENUE FOR THAT
PARTICULAR PROJECT.
THE PROPOSAL BROUGHT TO THE
CITY FOR THIS PROJECT AS MR.
TONY MENTIONED, INCLUDED THIS
CITY OWNING AND OPERATING THREE
PARKING DECKS THOSE PARKING
DECKS OF YOU AS YOU HAVE HEARD
,WERE INTENDED TO BE PHASED
OUT THE ESTIMATE FOR THOSE
THREE PARKING DECKS INCLUDING
FINANCING COSTS ABOUT ONE
HUNDRED AND FOUR MILLION
DOLLARS BASED ON THE PRO FORMA
THAT WE RECENTLY REVIEWED THE
ANTICIPATED TIF REVENUE
GENERATED WOULD IN TURN BE USED
TO SATISFY THAT SATISFY THE
DEBT PAYMENTS TAKEN OUT TO
FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE
PARKING DECKS.
THE PLAN WOULD BE FOR THE CITY
TO OWN AND OPERATE A TAX LIKE
LEVY A THIRD PARTY INITIALLY
AND THEN EVENTUALLY MR. TONY
MENTIONED BY YOU OF CREATING A
PARKING AUTHORITY WHICH WE
ANTICIPATE WILL BE NEEDED FOR
ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN T.C.
ONE CORRIDOR THE CITY ENGAGED
PFM CONSULTING TO COMPLETE AN
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
OF THE ABC'S SELF DEVELOPMENT.
KEVIN PLESNER, WHO IS JOINING
US VIA ZOOM WAS A LEAD ON THIS
PROJECT AND IS HERE TO ANSWER
DETAILED QUESTIONS AND WE NEED
TO ENGAGE HIM.
PHASE ONE OF THE ANALYSIS THAT
WE ASKED KEVIN AND HIS TEAM TO
LOOK AT WAS TO REVIEW THE
PERFORMANCE THE DEVELOPERS PRO
FORMA WHICH CRAWFORD HOYING
VERY COOPERATIVELY HANDED OVER
AND EXPLAINED AND WORKED VERY
CLOSELY WITH KEVIN AND
KEVIN TOOK A LOOK AT ALL THE
ASSUMPTIONS INCLUDING
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS RELATED TO
THE ANTICIPATED PARKING REVENUE
AS WELL AS THE ASSUMPTIONS WE
THEN FURTHER ENGAGED THE PFM
TEAM AND FOLLOWED UP WITH THE
REQUEST FOR ANALYSIS TO LOOK AT
THE DEVELOPMENT RETURN ON
INVESTMENT WITH AND WITHOUT THE
CITY'S PARTICIPATION AND TO
DETERMINE HOW THE LAND WAS
BEING VALUED IN THE PROPOSAL.
AND ALSO FINALLY AN ESTIMATED
COST OF THE CITY'S TOTAL
SUBSIDY AND IN OUR MOST RECENT
ASK OF PFM WE ASKED THEM TO
EVALUATE A REIMBURSEMENT MODEL
AS OPPOSED TO ISSUING DEBT TO
FUND THE STRUCTURES.
SO IN ESSENCE WE WANTED TO KNOW
WHAT THE MODEL WOULD LOOK LIKE
IF WE CHOSE TO REIMBURSE
CRAWFORD HOYING DIRECTLY AS
OPPOSED TO PULLING OUT DEBT AND
THEN WE ALSO ASKED THEM TO
COMPARE THE REVENUE STREAMS
TAXING THE TAX REVENUE
ASSOCIATED WITH THE PARKING
DECKS VERSUS THE PARKING
REVENUE STREAM.
THE RESULTS OF THOSE ANALYSIS
TO DATE ARE AS FOLLOWS.
ESSENTIALLY PFM INDICATED THAT
THE DEVELOPERS CASE ASSUMPTIONS
OF PARKING REVENUE AND THE TAX
VALUE ANALYSIS ARE CONSISTENT
WITH EXISTING MARKET RATES.
THE ESTIMATED HAVE GENERATED
FROM THE PROJECT WOULD BE
ENOUGH TO REIMBURSE THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE GARAGES AND
ALLOW FOR ADDITIONAL
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT IN
THIS CASE LIKELY THE INVESTMENT
AS A MINISTER TONY BENTWOOD
MENTIONED PREVIOUSLY WOULD BE
GOING TOWARDS UTILITY CAPACITY
IN THAT CORRIDOR.
WHAT THAT CURRENT INVESTMENT IN
THE UTILITY CAPACITY IS AT THIS
POINT WE DO NOT KNOW.
CURRENTLY PUBLIC SERVICES IS
ENGAGED IN THE COMPREHEND OF A
MASTER PLAN TO DETERMINE THAT
RECOMMENDATION AS WELL AS COST
ESTIMATES.
>> IT SHOULD BE NOTED THAT THIS
IS A THIRTY YEAR COMMITMENT
OF TIF REVENUE AND THAT COUNCIL
WILL BE APPROACHED WITH AT
LEAST THREE BOND ISSUANCES AS
THE PHASE PARKING GOES INTO
PLACE AND AS JENNIFER MENTIONED
,THE CITY WILL LIKELY HAVE TO
BOND AND LEVERAGE THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR HER TO
COMPLETE HER TRANSACTION FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AS PART
OF THIS PROJECT.
>> IN ADDITION, THE REVIEW THAT
PFM LOOKED AT WAS A 10 YEAR
FORMAL PERFORMA WHICH INDICATED
THAT PARKING GARAGES WOULD BE
REVENUE POSITIVE.
IT WAS ALSO DETERMINED BY THE
ANALYSIS THAT THE DEVELOPMENT
REQUIRES CITY PARTICIPATION TO
BE FINANCIALLY VIABLE.
THE INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN AND
RETURN OF EQUITY WITH THE
CITY'S PARTNER PARTICIPATION
ARE WITHIN THE INDUSTRY
STANDARDS FOR A PROJECT OF THIS
SIZE WE LOOKED AT THE LAND
VALUE ESTIMATED AS PART OF THIS
PROJECT AND IT'S ESTIMATED TO
BE FORTY THREE POINT TWO
DOLLARS DOLLARS.
AGAIN, AS I MENTIONED, THE
CITY'S INVESTMENT THIS PERFORMA
INDICATED ESTIMATED TO BE ONE
HUNDRED FOUR MILLION WHICH
COVERS THE COST OF THREE
PARKING DECKS AND THE LAND
ASSOCIATED WITH THOSE STACKS.
THE UTILIZATION OF THE
REIMBURSEMENT MODEL APPEARS TO
BE A POTENTIAL OPTION.
WE TOOK A LOOK AT THIS OPTION
THAT WOULD INCREASE THE CITY'S
COST, HOWEVER, DECREASE THE
RISK ASSOCIATED WITH IT SO AT
THIS POINT EARLY ON IN THE IN
THE ANALYSIS IT APPEARS THAT
THIS IS A VIABLE OPTION.
I WOULD SAY THAT MORE DETAILED
SCOPING OF THAT OPTION IS TO
OCCUR ON BOTH SIDES OF THE COIN
BOTH BY THE CITY AND THE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM.
AND THEN FINALLY IF WE STRICTLY
COMPARE THE REVENUE STREAMS
ASSOCIATED WITH A PARKING
REVENUE TO THE TAX ASSOCIATED
WITH THE PARKING DECKS, THE
PARKING REVENUE WOULD EXCEED
THE TAX REVENUE.
THAT OF COURSE IS CONTINGENT
UPON THE APPROPRIATE PARKING
RATES, THE NUMBER OF PERMITS
ISSUED AND A SCALING OF THE
PROJECT APPROPRIATELY.
THAT ALSO IS BASED ON THE PRO
FORMA DATA SET THAT WAS
PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPMENT
TEAM AND REVIEWED BY PFM PUBLIC
PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERSHIPS THAT UTILIZE
BROWNFIELD TIF ARE QUITE
COMMON.
WHAT IS NOT COMMON IS
THE
AMOUNT AND THE SIZE OF THIS
PARTICULAR BROWNFIELD.
EACH PROJECT ON THIS LIST IS
UNIQUE AND IN NATURE AND
PRESENTS ITS OWN CHALLENGES
RISK AND REWARDS LISTED HERE
ARE A FEW NOTEWORTHY PROJECTS
THAT INCLUDE MANY MIXED USE
DEVELOPMENTS AND SOME INCLUDE
PARKING COMPONENTS.
>> WHAT'S NEXT AFTER TONIGHT WE
EXPECT COUNCIL TO CONSIDER THE
PROPOSAL THAT IS BEFORE AND
PROVIDE FEEDBACK FEEDBACK FOR
STAFF TO CONTINUE DUE DILIGENCE
PROCESS ALL INCLUDING FINANCIAL
AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS,
CONSIDERATION OF A PARKING
AUTHORITY, UTILITY CAPACITY
REQUIREMENTS AND IN THE PAST
THE POTENTIAL BOND ISSUANCES
FOR BOTH THE PARKING DECKS AND
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COMPONENT.
ALL OF THAT WILL INFORM THE
DEAL IN THE DEAL STRUCTURE AND
THE NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM.
AND THEN FINALLY WE END UP WITH
AN AGREEMENT WITH OXFORD AND
CRAWFORD HOYNE.
THAT IS ALL I HAVE.
THERE ARE ANY QUESTIONS?
YES.
NO QUESTIONS YET
.
THAT'S ALL IT IS WORTH
SO QUESTIONS YES.
WRAP UP MR. COHEN.
WELL,
WHAT I THINK WE ALL GLEAN
AND EVERY TIME WE DEAL WITH
THIS PROJECT WE HEAR THIS IS A
VERY COMPLICATED DEVELOPMENT.
>> THE PHASING PART ALLOWS ALL
OF THE PIECES TO FALL INTO
PLACE.
THE HEART OPTION THAT WE HAVE
TO CHOOSE FROM.
WE'RE STILL WORKING ON THAT.
>> BUT WE WILL COME TO YOU WHEN
WE KNOW WHAT THAT IS.
JENNIFER HAS SPOKEN ABOUT HER
PORTION AND WE ARE PREPARED TO
DO THE BONDING FOR HER PORTION
WHICH WE'VE ALREADY DONE.
IT WASN'T TRIAL ONE BUT WE'VE
ALREADY DONE ONE WITH CATHERINE
STREET THAT WE KNOW WE CAN DO
THAT ANY OF THE PEOPLE CAN
ANSWER QUESTIONS BASED ON WHAT
YOUR QUESTIONS ARE SO IT'LL BE
DIFFERENT FOLKS COMING UP
DEPENDING ON WHAT YOU WANT TO
TALK ABOUT.
COUNCILMAN, WE'RE DENHA FIRST
THING BRITISH.
THANK YOU, MAYOR.
I HAVE A FEW INITIAL QUESTIONS
AT LEAST AND I THINK MAYBE I'LL
START WITH THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
I'LL TRY TO KEEP THEM ALL
TOGETHER.
THANK MYSELF.
SO I GUESS MY FIRST QUESTION
WITH RESPECT TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND I KNOW THAT WE'RE
DOING THIS ACROSS AND WE'VE
TALKED ABOUT THIS AT VARIOUS
CAPACITIES AND REALLY THE
ABILITY FOR US TO MAXIMIZE THE
NUMBER OF UNITS BY YOUR ABILITY
TO TURN ONE DOLLAR INTO
MULTIPLE DOLLARS IS IS
IMPORTANT.
I GUESS ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
THAT I HAVE AROUND THIS
SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT IS THAT
WITH THE BROWNFIELD TIF THERE
ARE SOME AFFORDABLE HOUSING
REQUIREMENTS INVOLVED AND I
THINK IT'S UP TO 15 PERCENT
OF THE UNITS WOULD NEED TO BE
AFFORDABLE.
SO I GUESS I WONDER SPECIFIC TO
THIS SITE WHAT ARE SOME OF THE
ADDITIONAL BENEFITS OF HAVING
THE HOUSING COMMISSION KIND
OF TAKE OWNERSHIP OF THIS?
IT SOUNDS LIKE WE ARE GETTING A
FEW MORE UNITS IN THAT 15
PERCENT.
OBVIOUSLY THERE ARE SOME
SERVICES INVOLVED.
ARE THERE OTHER BENEFITS WE
SHOULD BE THINKING ABOUT AS
OPPOSED TO KIND OF FALLING BACK
ON THE 15 PERCENT REQUIREMENT
IN THE BROWNFIELD AND THEN KIND
OF CONNECTED TO THAT I ASSUME
BASED ON WHAT I HEARD FROM YOU
THAT THAT PHASE ONE THAT WE SAW
ON THE MAP IS THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING COMPONENT.
I GUESS I WONDER KNOWING THAT
THE PHASE FIVE WAS THE PIECE
THAT WAS NEXT TO IT PHASE TWO
IS NEXT FOR HOW LONG WILL THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BE
DISCONNECTED FROM THE REST
OF THAT NEIGHBORHOOD?
AND AND THEN I GUESS ALSO
THINKING ABOUT WHERE THAT KIND
OF CENTRAL CORRIDOR IS AND THE
THINGS THAT WE'RE THINKING
ABOUT WHAT IS THE LEVEL
OF ACCESS THAT THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS WILL HAVE TO THE
REST OF THAT SPACE.
AND I ASKED THIS QUESTION
SPECIFICALLY BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY
ONE OF THE BENEFITS OF NOT
HAVING A SINGLE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING HOUSING COMMISSION OWN
SPACE MEANS THAT YOU MIGHT HAVE
KIND OF MORE MIXED INCOME
HOUSING THROUGHOUT AND THERE
ARE OBVIOUSLY BENEFITS TO THAT
AS WELL.
AND SO THAT'S KIND OF MY
INITIAL BIG QUESTION IN THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING SECTION.
>> I THINK THE SINGLE BIGGEST
BENEFIT IS THE WILLINGNESS FOR
THE DEVELOPER TO INCLUDE TWO
HUNDRED THAT'S OUR GOAL
OF AFFORDABLE UNITS RATHER THAN
THE MINIMUM REQUIRED OF ONE
HUNDRED FIFTY FIFTY IS A
STANDARD SORT OF LIKE TECH TAX
CREDIT DEAL IS LIKE FIFTY SIXTY
UNITS SO THAT'S LIKE AN ENTIRE
PROJECT FOR US THAT WE WOULDN'T
HAVE TO DO IT REALLY IT'S LIKE
FOUR OF THEM BECAUSE WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT TWO HUNDRED UNITS
.
IT'S MUCH MORE SIGNIFICANT THAN
WHAT WE DO ON OUR OWN.
THE COST IS GOING TO BE MUCH
LESS BECAUSE OF BEING PART
OF THIS LARGER PROJECT AND I
PERSONALLY I MEAN OBVIOUSLY
IT'S A SELF INTEREST WITH OUR
ORGANIZATION BUT MY
OBSERVATIONS HOW THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS HAVE
WORKED HISTORICALLY I DO SEE
MUCH BIGGER BENEFIT WHEN A
MISSION OWNED NONPROFIT OWNS
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS.
THIS IS A OF UVM GRAD AS WELL.
SO THERE'S NOTHING AGAINST U
OF M STUDENTS WHICH NEED
HOUSING BUT A LOT OF TIMES WE
END UP GETTING STUDENTS IN OUR
HOUSING WE CANNOT IT'S A FAIR
HOUSING ISSUE.
YOU CAN'T DISCRIMINATE BECAUSE
OF WHAT SOMEONE'S STUDENT
STATUS IS BUT IF WE HAVE A
MISSION DRIVEN PROJECT IT TENDS
TO BE MORE OF LOW INCOME
WORKERS IN THE COMMUNITY AND
NOT U OF M STUDENTS AND I'D
LIKE I LIKE THE FACT THAT U
OF M IS GOING TO BE TAKING CARE
OF THAT ISSUE THEMSELVES IN THE
NEAR FUTURE.
AND ON THE SECOND QUESTION I
ACTUALLY WOULD NEED YOU TO TALK
ABOUT THAT.
THANK YOU.
FAZING.
THAT'S A GOOD ONE AND THERE'S A
COUPLE OF INNER LIFE IN
OVERLAPPING REASONS AS I MIX MY
METAPHORS HERE FOR THE
LOCATION.
A PRIMARY REASON IS THAT THE
PARTICULAR LOCATION THAT IS
TARGETED FOR THIS PORTION
OF THE DEVELOPMENT IS ITS PAD
READY.
>> THERE'S MINIMAL DEMO THAT
NEEDS TO HAPPEN.
>> IT IS ON ITS FRONTAGE THAT
WILL LARGELY REUSE SOME OF THE
STREETSCAPE THAT'S EXISTING ON
THE SITE.
IT ALSO HAS ACCESS TO THE
EASTERN PORTION OF THE SITE
ALREADY.
SO IT IS NOT IMPACTED BY SOME
OF THE OTHER FAZING.
THAT IS A REASON FOR TO BE
THERE AS IT RELATES TO THE
CONNECTIVITY OF THE REST OF THE
DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S ACTUALLY NOT GOING TO BE
ON IN THE ISLAND AT ANY POINT
IN TIME DIRECTLY ACROSS FROM IT
FROM A NORTH SOUTH STANDPOINT
DIRECTLY TO THE SOUTH IS
ACTUALLY THE EXISTING PARKING
DECK AND THE ADJACENT SLIVER
OF A LOT THAT'S NEXT TO THAT
PARKING DECK.
SO A PORTION OF THE REASON THE
THE THAT PARTICULAR BUILDING IS
IS GOING TO THAT PORTION OF THE
SITE IS BECAUSE THERE'S PARKING
INFRASTRUCTURE EXISTING THAT
CAN SUPPORT IT WHILE WE BUILD
THE REST OF THE SITE.
IT'S A UNIQUENESS OF THIS SITE
OVERALL THAT IN ORDER TO
SUPPORT THE OFFICE USES THAT
ARE ALREADY THERE WE NEED TO
PHASE THE PROJECT SO THAT
EXISTING PARKING DECK STAYS IN
PLACE WHILE WE DO THE EARLY
PHASES SO THAT PARKING
STRUCTURE WILL SERVICE THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPONENT
AND IT'LL SERVICE OUR INITIAL
PHASES WHILE WE'RE BUILDING THE
PARKING GARAGES THERE AND IT'LL
SERVICE THE OFFICE PHASES AND
THEN IT WON'T BE UNTIL WE HAVE
ENOUGH PARKING INFRASTRUCTURE
BUILD OUT OTHER PORTIONS OF THE
SITE THAT WILL DEMO THAT
PARKING DECK IN FAVOR OF MORE
DENSE MOSTLY HOUSING AND
ENTERTAINMENT USES AND A TALLER
AND MORE EFFICIENT PARKING DECK
.
SO AT NO POINT IN TIME WITH THE
SMALL EXCEPTION OF WHEN WE'RE
GOING THROUGH THE DEMO AND
CONSTRUCTION OF THE STUFF THERE
IN FRONT OF THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING BUILDING ITSELF AT NO
POINT IN TIME WILL ACTUALLY BE
DISCONNECTED FROM WHAT'S THERE.
IT WILL BE CONNECTED DAY ONE TO
THAT PARKING DECK AND THEN WHEN
YOU LOOK AT THE PROJECT FOR
COMPLETION, IT'S JUST GOING TO
BE A CONTINUATION OF THE
DEVELOPMENT IN LARGE.
SO BUT THERE'S SOME UNIQUENESS
TO THE EXISTING PARKING
SITUATION THAT'S DICTATING SORT
OF THAT SEQUENCING SO THE NEXT
PIECE THAT I WILL JUMP INTO AND
THEN I'M GOING TO PASS IT ALONG
TO OTHERS IS SPEAKING A SEGWAY
INTO PARKING AND SO I GUESS ONE
I GUESS I WANTED TO ASK ABOUT
WHERE HOW YOU LANDED ON KIND
OF THE NEEDS OF PARKING YOU
KNOW, IS THREE DECKS NECESSARY
VERSUS TWO X LIKE WHAT WHAT IS
THE FORMULATION THAT WENT INTO
THAT ACKNOWLEDGING THAT SOME
OF OUR DOWNTOWN STRUCTURES HAVE
ENTIRE FLOORS OF VACANCY ALL
THE TIME?
AND I GUESS AGAIN SINCE THIS
WILL BE MY LAST QUESTION HERE,
I'LL THROW AN ADDITION ON TO IT
IS AS WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
PLACEMAKING AND OBVIOUSLY
HOPING THAT MAYBE SOME OF THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE LIVING IN THESE
NEW UNITS ARE WORKING THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD AND FREQUENTING
THE RESTAURANTS IN THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD.
WHAT ARE SOME OF ONE OF THE
THINGS I DIDN'T HEAR OR THINK
ABOUT
I THINK IN THIS IS WHAT
ARE SOME OF THE ALTERNATIVE
TRANSIT METHODS THAT YOU'RE
THINKING ABOUT TO CREATE
CONNECTIVITY TO THE REST OF THE
CITY?
ARE THERE PLANS FOR LIKE LARGE
SCALE BIKE SHARING OR BICYCLE
PARKING?
ARE THERE PLANS ARE YOU WORKING
WITH THE RIDE TO DEVELOP YOU
KNOW, AN EXPRESS ROUTE DOWNTOWN
SO THAT THIS ISN'T AN
ALTERNATIVE DOWNTOWN BUT IT'S
AN EXTENSION OF OUR CITY AND SO
I GUESS I THINK ABOUT ALL
OF THAT AS I THINK ABOUT THE
PARKING NEEDS VERSUS THE PEOPLE
NEEDS.
ABSOLUTELY.
SO FROM THE TOTAL SPACES IN THE
DECK STRUCTURE THERE'S THERE'S
A LOT OF OVERLAPPING
CONSIDERATIONS THAT GOES INTO
THAT AS WELL AND THERE'S A
COMBINATION OF NATIONAL
RESOURCES PARKING SHARING THAT
WE'VE RELIED ON FROM A PARKING
STUDY STANDPOINT LARGELY
INCLUSIVE OF THOSE PUT OUT BY
THE URBAN LAND INSTITUTE.
BUT ALSO THIS IS NOT OUR ONLY
DEVELOPMENT OF SCALE AND WE'RE
BASING THIS ON OUR EXPERIENCE
AND AT EVERY PHASE THAT WE'VE
BUILT IN PRIOR DEVELOPMENTS IN
BRIDGE PARK BEING THE MOST
STARK OF IT EVERY ADDITIONAL
PHASE HAS REQUIRED LESS AND
LESS PARKING AND I THINK THE
LEARNING THAT WE'VE DONE FROM
OUR PRIOR DEVELOPMENTS HAS US
LOOKING AT A TIGHTER PARKING
RATIO HERE THAN WE'VE USED AT
OTHER DEVELOPMENTS BECAUSE
WE'VE SEEN EXCESS PARKING.
IT'S ALLOWED US TO SCALE BACK
AND REALLY MAXIMIZE THE PARKING
AND OUR OTHER DEVELOPMENTS AND
WE DO NOT WANT EMPTY PARKING
DECKS OR EMPTY PARKING FLOORS
SO THE OVERALL NEED IS BASED ON
EXPERIENCE AND STUDIES.
THE THREE DECKS IS BASED ON
FINANCING CONSIDERATIONS AND
SPECIFICALLY YOU HEARD ME TALK
A LITTLE BIT EARLIER ABOUT HOW
WE'RE GOING TO LINE THE PHASING
SO THAT THE PRIVATE
IMPROVEMENTS FULLY SUPPORT THE
BOND SERVICE FOR EACH OF THE
INDIVIDUAL PARKING DECKS.
AND WHAT WE'VE DONE IS WE'VE
WE'VE TAKEN A DEVELOPMENT TRIED
TO ALLOCATE THE PARKING THE
RIGHT PLACES IN DEVELOPMENT SO
IT HAS THE LEAST NEGATIVE
IMPACT ON THE FEEL ON THE
STREET.
SO THE DENSITY IS STILL AMONG
ACTIVE USERS, NOT AMONG PARKING
BUT THEN ALSO SPACED IT OUT SO
THAT OUR PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS
CAN BE CONSTRUCTED ALONGSIDE
THE PARKING DECKS IN A WAY THAT
THERE'S NEVER AN ECONOMIC
SHORTFALL.
SO THE TOTAL SPACES IS A
FUNCTION OF EXPERIENCE AND NEED
THE NUMBER OF DECKS AND THE WAY
THOSE TOTAL SPACES IS DIVIDED
IS A LOT ABOUT THE FINANCIAL
MAGIC THAT GOES INTO THIS AND
RESPONDING TO YOUR QUESTION
MORE ABOUT CONNECTIVITY AND
TRANSPORTATION, THERE'S
ABSOLUTELY GOING TO BE
CONNECTION TO THE CITIES WALK
PATHS AND BIKE PATHS.
THAT'S AN IMPORTANT PART OF THE
THE DEVELOPMENT FOR US.
THERE IS NO CLASS A DEVELOPMENT
THAT WE HAVE IN OUR ENTIRE
PORTFOLIO WHERE WE DON'T HAVE A
SUBSTANTIAL CONSIDERATION FOR
THINGS LIKE SECURE BIKE ROOMS
FOR RESIDENTS AND WHERE
APPLICABLE COMMERCIAL TENANTS
AS WELL.
THERE WILL ABSOLUTELY BE ON
STREET OR IN GARAGE OPTIONS.
WE'RE STILL WORKING THROUGH THE
ENGINEERING FOR THE PUBLIC AT
LARGE TO HAVE MY CONNECTIVITY.
WE'VE BEEN AND PRETTY
CONSISTENT COMMUNICATION WITH
TRANSIT AUTHORITY ON WHAT THEIR
PLANS ARE AND HOW OUR
DEVELOPMENT MAY MAY IMPACT OUR
PLANS.
I THINK THE SOME OF THE
INFRASTRUCTURE DISCUSSIONS THAT
MILTON ALLUDED TO IN HIS PRIOR
REMARKS THE SOME OF THE
INVESTIGATIONS ONGOING EXACTLY
WHAT THE RIGHT NEEDS ARE.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
PROVIDING CONNECTIVITY IN THE
RIGHT PLACES AND WE ALSO WANT
TO MAKE SURE WE'RE PROVIDING
CONNECTIVITY THAT'S IN DEMAND
AND YOU DOWN DOWNTOWN IS IS
MORE THAN JUST ONE NODE AS WELL
ANN ARBOR AND SO AS IT RELATES
TO THAT CONNECTIVITY, I THINK
THAT'S A DISCUSSION THAT'S
ONGOING.
BUT WE DO SEE IT AS VERY
IMPORTANT AND IT IS PART OF THE
LONGER TERM DISCUSSIONS WITH
WITH THE CITY STAFF AND AND
REALLY WITH WITH OUR INTERNAL
PEOPLE FROM A DEMAND STANDPOINT
BECAUSE IF THERE'S A
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND THAT'S A
DEMAND THAT EXISTS AMONG OUR
CONSUMER BASE AS WELL AND WE
WANT OUR CONSUMER BASE TO BE
HAPPY.
SO THANK YOU, COUNCILOR.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION
.
IT'S BEEN I'M SORRY.
YES.
OH I'M SORRY I DIDN'T IF I
COULD ANSWER PART OF TRAVISS
QUESTION DEREK REMINDED ME
OF SOMETHING IMPORTANT WHICH IS
THAT THE HOUSING COMMISSION
LIKE OUR FULL TIME JOB IS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
WE'RE CONSTANTLY DO AN INCOME
CERTIFICATIONS LIKE THAT'S OUR
JOB OR INSPECTIONS.
THAT'S OUR OUR BUSINESS.
THOSE 50 UNITS I MENTIONED IT
DURING MY PRESENTATION THAT THE
CITY HAS UNDER RESTRICTION WITH
SCATTERED SITE MARKET RATE
DEVELOPERS THAT IS CONTRACTED
WITH THE COUNTY.
THE COUNTY ACTUALLY DOES THAT
INCOME CERTIFICATION AND SO
THEY HAVE FIFTY UNITS.
THAT'S A LITTLE PIECE OF WHAT
THEY DO IS THEIR JOB.
WE HAVE OVER TWO THOUSAND
UNITS.
THAT'S WHAT WE DO ALL DAY LONG
AND THEY DON'T HAVE THE
CAPACITY TO ADD ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY TWO HUNDRED UNITS INTO
THAT CONTRACT THAT WE HAVE WITH
THEM.
BUT THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE
CAN ABSORB IS JUST PART OF OUR
OUR REGULAR JOB BECAUSE WE'RE
JUST OK.
I WILL TRY NOT TO FORGET TO
WRITE THAT DOWN BUT OK I WOULD
LIKE TO AGAIN THANK YOU FOR THE
PRESENTATION.
THIS IS THIS IS AN IMPORTANT
STEP TOWARD OUR VISION OF ONE.
>> BUT I WANT TO KEEP TALKING
ABOUT PARKING BECAUSE WHAT WE
HOPE TO DO IS GET PEOPLE OUT
OF THEIR CARS.
AND SO I WOULD LIKE TO TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE INTO THE
DETAILS ABOUT THE ASSUMPTIONS
THAT ARE BEING MADE ABOUT THE
FINANCIAL BENEFITS TO THE CITY,
THE TRADE OFFS.
AND THEN I WANT TO ASK A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT FUTURE
PROOFING SO IN YOUR IN YOUR
ANSWER TO TO COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA YOU TALKED ABOUT YOUR
CALCULATION OF THE OVERALL NEED
FOR THE PARKING BASED ON YOU'VE
DRAWN ON RESOURCES AND PRIOR
EXPERIENCE.
BUT YOU NOTED THAT THAT THE
NUMBER OF DECKS AND WHERE THEY
ARE PLACED HAS TO DO WITH THE
FINANCIAL MAGIC.
THAT WAS YOUR QUOTE I'M SORRY
I'M NOT FAMILIAR WITH FINANCIAL
MAGIC AND SO IF YOU COULD
CLARIFY THAT, THAT WOULD BE
GREAT.
AND LET ME JUST SAY A COUPLE DO
YOU ALL MY QUESTIONS UP FRONT
ARE YOU DO YOU WANT TO JUMP IN?
OK, THAT'S I MEAN I'M OK WITH
WHEREVER I MEAN IF I WOULD
FORGET ACTUALLY BUT ANYWAY SO
PLEASE CLARIFY THAT THEN I
WOULD LIKE TO HAVE A FEW MORE
DETAILS AND THIS MAY BE EITHER
YOU FROM PUSH ON I'M NOT SURE
WHOSE RIGHT TO ASK BUT I'D LIKE
TO KNOW WHAT THE DIFFERENCE IS
BETWEEN THE PARKING REVENUE
THAT YOU ESTIMATE THAT THE CITY
WOULD RECEIVE AND THE TAXES
THAT WOULD BE PAID IF THE DECKS
WERE NOT OWNED BY THE CITY.
SO I'D LIKE TO UNDERSTAND WHAT
THE DIFFERENCE IS BETWEEN THOSE
NUMBERS AND I'D LIKE TO
UNDERSTAND A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT HOW YOU ARE MAKING YOUR
ESTIMATE FOR WHAT PARKING
REVENUES FROM THESE DECKS WOULD
BE AND I DON'T KNOW IF YOU HAVE
A NUMBER BUT IF YOU DID I WOULD
BE CURIOUS TO KNOW IT AND THEN
SO THEN MY THIRD AND FINAL
QUESTION ABOUT THIS PART IS
PARKING INFRASTRUCTURE IS
INCONSISTENT WITH OUR VISION
FOR THESE TRANSIT CORRIDORS YET
WE UNDERSTAND THAT WE ARE IN A
TRANSITION AND THAT PEOPLE, AS
YOU SAID, ARE NOT GOING TO GIVE
UP THEIR CARS RIGHT AWAY.
PEOPLE ARE LIKELY TO MOVE FROM
TWO TO ONE CAR HOUSEHOLD BUT
WE'RE NOT GOING TO SEE YOU
KNOW, THE CARS ARE NOT GOING TO
GO AWAY NOW THIS PROJECT
ACKNOWLEDGES THAT I BELIEVE
BECAUSE I'VE BEEN IN ON SOME
OF THE THINGS THROUGH PLANNING
EMISSION BY BUILDING THE
PARKING STRUCTURE SO THAT THEY
CAN BE REPURPOSED.
AND WHAT I WANT TO UNDERSTAND
IS HAVE YOU HOW CAN WE ASSURE
THAT THE PARKING STRUCTURES
WILL BE DESIGNED AND BUILT TO
THE UTMOST STANDARD THAT WE
WILL NEED THEM IN THE FUTURE TO
REPURPOSE THEM BECAUSE YOU'RE
BUILDING THEM?
WE'RE TAKING WE'RE TAKING THEM
ON.
WE'RE MAINTAINING THEM.
WE WANT TO BE SURE IN 15 OR 20
YEARS AND I'M BEING OPTIMISTIC
WHEN WE WANT TO PUT HOUSING OR
MAKE THOSE STRUCTURES INTO
HOUSING OR PUT SOME HOUSING ON
TOP OF THEM AND PUT THEM INTO
THEY'RE NOT CRUMBLING
.
>> THANK YOU SO I THINK THAT I
COUNT FOR TOTAL QUESTIONS OR
WAS IT FIVE?
I'LL WORK THROUGH IT AND IF I
MISS ONE DRAW ME BACK TO IT.
I APOLOGIZE.
>> SO THE I THINK THE FIRST ONE
THAT I PICKED UP ON WAS ABOUT
THE CONCEPT OF FUTURE PROOFING
GENERALLY NOT NECESSARILY THE
PARKING STRUCTURE DESIGN BUT
FUTURE PROOFING AND I THINK
THERE'S A COUPLE COMPONENT
PARTS THAT TO THE PLAN THAT WE
HAVE BEEN DISCUSSING THAT HELP
WITH FUTURE PROOFING ONE WE'VE
TALKED ABOUT ALREADY WHICH IS
PHASING AND WE WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE BUILDING THE
PARKING AS WE GO TO SUIT THE
USES AS WE GO.
I THINK ANOTHER REALLY
IMPORTANT COMPONENT PART OF THE
CORE THESIS OF WHAT'S BEING
PROPOSED IS THAT THE REALITY IS
IF THE CITY OWNS THE PARKING
GARAGES, THE CITY WILL CONTROL
THE DESTINY FOR
WHAT HAPPENS
WITH THOSE PARKING GARAGES AND
THAT DIRT AND I THINK THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT COMPONENT PART TO YOU
KNOW WHAT THE CITY GETS OUT
OF THE PROPOSAL THAT WE'RE
WE'RE DISCUSSING AT LARGE THE
IN THE FUTURE IF WE HAVE LESS
CARS WE WILL PRESUMABLY NEED
LESS PARKING AND WE WOULD LIKE
TO REPURPOSE THAT NOT JUST THE
STRUCTURES THEMSELVES BUT MAYBE
THE GROUND AT LARGE, MAYBE FROM
A DEMO AND A REPURPOSING.
SO I THINK THAT'S THERE
PHILOSOPHICALLY SPEAKING THIS
IS ANECDOTAL BUT I THINK IT'S
POWERFUL.
WHAT WE'VE SEEN IN OUR
DEVELOPMENTS IS WHAT WE'VE BEEN
ABLE TO DO IN PLACES WHERE
WE'VE BUILT PARKING STRUCTURES
WHERE THERE WEREN'T BEFORE IS
DRAW PEOPLE INTO THE COMMUNITY
WHERE THEY WANT TO LIVE AND
HAVE THIS VIBRANCY THEY BEGIN
TO PARK THEIR CAR IN THIS
PARKING STRUCTURE THAT THEY
HAVE AND THEY FIND OUT OVER
TIME THAT THEY DON'T NEED ALL
THREE CARS BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
DRIVING AS MUCH AND MAYBE A
COUPLE OF THE FOLKS FIND THAT
THEY DON'T NEED ANY CARS
BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT DRIVING AS
MUCH AND THAT THAT HAPPENS JUST
WITH OUR RESIDENTS BUT IT
HAPPENS WITH OUR HOTEL GUESTS
WHERE OVER TIME THE UBER TRIPS
INCREASE AND THE RENTAL CARS
DECREASE AND WE DON'T HAVE
GREAT STATS ON THAT BUT WE HAVE
GOOD ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE AND AND
SO GETTING CARS OFF OF THE
MASSIVE SURFACE LOTS AND INTO A
PARKING GARAGE IN A COMMUNITY
WHERE PEOPLE WANT TO BE AND
DON'T WANT TO USE THEIR CAR IS
A STEP IN REDUCING THE NEED FOR
CARS AND IT'S CERTAINLY NOT THE
ONLY ONE.
AND I THINK ALL OF YOUR OTHER
CONCERNS ARE UNDERSTOOD AND
WELL-FOUNDED.
BUT A LOT OF THE FUTURE
PROOFING THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT COMES COMES THROUGH THE
EVOLUTION OF THE COMMUNITY THAT
EVOLVES BECAUSE OF THE
COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE THAT'S
IN PLACE, INCLUDING THE
APPROPRIATENESS OF THE PARKING
GARAGES.
I AM SURE THAT MY GOOD FRIEND
JEFF HOUTMAN WHEN I USE THE
WORD MAGIC PROBABLY SENT ME A
NICE NASTY TEXT WHEN I DESCRIBE
FINANCIAL COMPONENTS BUT THE
FINANCIAL MAGIC THAT I WAS
REALLY REFERENCING IS THE FACT
THAT WE ARE LOOKING AT MULTIPLE
VARIABLES AT THE SAME TIME TO
TALK ABOUT WHAT OUR DENSITIES
ARE.
THERE ISN'T ENOUGH FINANCIAL
CAPACITY IN THE PRIVATE
IMPROVEMENTS TO JUSTIFY
BUILDING A SINGLE DECK OR A
SINGLE STRUCTURE ALL AT ONCE
WITHOUT ADDITIONAL RISK INTO
THE FINANCIAL MODEL WHEN IT
COMES TO THE REVENUE QUESTION
THAT YOU ASKED AND AS IT
RELATES TO SOME OF THE OTHER
ASSURANCES I MAY TURN IT OVER
TO TO MILTON THE CITY HERE.
THE REALITY IS WE'VE DISCUSSED
A LOT OF DIFFERENT STRUCTURES
FINANCIALLY A LOT OF DIFFERENT
POTENTIAL DESIGN OPTIONS THAT
COULD EXIST AS IT RELATES TO
THE GARAGES SO LONG AS THE CITY
IS CONSTRUCTING OPERATING AND
FINANCING THE DRUDGES, WE WANT
TO MAKE THEM AS ROBUST AS THE
CITY WANTS TO SEE THEM.
IN ALL OF THE RESPECTS THAT YOU
ASKED ABOUT.
BUT THERE'S MULTIPLE VARIABLES
THAT GO INTO THAT THAT'S DESIGN
WHICH WE ANTICIPATE THE CITY
WILL WEIGH IN ON AND IN SOME
CASES DICTATE THAT'S THE
FINANCIAL MECHANISMS TO PAY FOR
IT WHICH THE CITY IS GOING TO
WORK ON AND IT'S THE
INTERSECTION NOT JUST WITH THE
GARAGES BUT ALL OF THE
INFRASTRUCTURE.
THE FOOTNOTE THE COUNCIL REDUCE
WHEN YOU ASKED ABOUT THE
GARAGES NOT BEING CRUMBLING
THAT GOES TO HOW THEY'RE
MANAGED.
THAT'S WHERE THE THAT'S WHERE
AN ENTITY LIKE A PARKING
AUTHORITY COMES IN WHERE YOUR
RATES ARE NOT SET POLITICALLY.
THEY'RE BASED ON BUSINESS BASIS
THAT THE MAINTENANCE AND UPKEEP
OF THE STRUCTURE IS NOT SKIP OR
DEFERRED.
IT HAPPENS WHEN IT NEEDS TO
HAPPEN.
THAT'S HOW YOU ENSURE THAT THE
STRUCTURE IS YOU GET MAXIMUM
USE OUT OF IT AND THEN IF THE
MARKET DETERMINE IS AT A LATER
DATE IT'S TIME TO TRANSITION TO
HOUSING VERSUS THE PARKING
CAPACITY.
THE ASSET THAT YOU'VE BUILT AND
INVESTED IN IS IN ITS MOST
PEACON AND POSSIBLE TO MAKE THE
TRANSITION THAT YOU'RE
REFERRING TO
.
OK SO THE ONE MORE QUESTION
THAT I WANT TO ASK IS AGAIN
BECAUSE THIS IS I MEAN I THINK
WE REFER TO THE MAGNITUDE
OF THIS PROJECT AS A THING THAT
CREATES FEAR BUT IT'S ALSO
INSPIRING TO BE LOOKING AT A
PROJECT OF THIS MAGNITUDE AND
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT'S
INSPIRING IS IT WOULD BE A
MARVELOUS PILOT FOR GEOTHERMAL
HEATING.
IT WOULD ALSO BE REALLY GREAT
TO GET THIS PROJECT TO SIGN UP
FOR OUR SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY BECAUSE IT WOULD HELP
GET THAT OFF THE GROUND.
AND I WONDERED IF YOU HAD
THOUGHT OF IT IF IF IF OUR
SOUTH HAS DONE AN ANALYSIS
OF THE POTENTIAL COST SAVINGS
TO YOU IF YOU WERE TO
PARTICIPATE IN OUR SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY UTILITY AND IF YOU'D BE
WILLING TO WORK WITH THE CITY
TO DO THAT.
>> THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION AND
VERY TIMELY IN LIGHT OF THE
ELECTION RESULTS FROM THE OTHER
NIGHT, WE HAVE WE HAVE HAD
MULTIPLE CONVERSATIONS WITH
MAZEY STULTS AND ARE EXCITED TO
EXPLORE THE POSSIBILITIES
ASSOCIATED WITH GEOTHERMAL.
WE'VE ACTUALLY BEEN DOWN THE
PATH ONCE ALREADY AS IT RELATES
TO THE EARLIEST PHASE
OF SEEKING SOME GRANT FUNDS TO
TRY TO BRING GEOTHERMAL TO
REALITY BEFORE BEFORE PROPOSAL
A PASSED AND WHEN THAT WAS NOT
AN OPTION.
WE ARE EXCITED ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY POSSIBILITIES THAT
THAT NEW UTILITY BRINGS.
WE HAVE THE AS OF NOW I DO NOT
BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE ENOUGH
INFORMATION TO EVALUATE WHAT
THE COST SAVINGS ARE BUT WE ARE
ANXIOUS TO GET THAT INFORMATION
.
WE ARE INTENDING TO BE FULLY
ENGAGED IN DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
WHAT OPPORTUNITIES THERE ARE TO
PARTICIPATE I THINK ARE OUR
CONCERNS AS IT RELATES TO
PARTICIPATION ARE REALLY ABOUT
TIMING CAPACITY AS MUCH AS
ANYTHING AND WE ARE INTENDING
TO BE ENGAGED IN THE
CONVERSATION FROM START TO
FINISH AND OUR HOPEFUL THAT
THAT CAPACITY DOES COME TO
FRUITION IN A WAY THAT WE CAN
USE.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT I CAN SAY
UNEQUIVOCALLY SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY IS A GOOD THING NOT JUST
FOR CITIES AND COMMUNITIES.
IT'S A GOOD THING FOR PRIVATE
DEVELOPERS AS WELL AND WE WANT
OUR COMMUNITY SUSTAINABLE FOR
FOREVER AND ALL THE WAYS
POSSIBLE AND IF IF THE CAPACITY
IS THERE AND IF WE'RE ABLE TO
VALIDATE THAT USING THAT
CAPACITY IS BENEFICIAL TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE COMMUNITY,
WE'RE ABSOLUTELY INTERESTED IN
USING IT.
I THINK AT THIS STAGE WE HAVE A
LOT OF WORK TO DO AND WE'RE
ROLLING UP OUR SLEEVES TO DO IT
AND WE'RE EAGER TO SEE IT
BECOME A REALITY FOR EXACTLY
TWO MONTHS AND THEN THE
INTERNAL PERSPECTIVE WE ARE
PROJECTING THE SEIU TO BE READY
FOR CUSTOMERS AS IT WERE
EIGHTEEN TO TWENTY FOUR MONTHS.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE PUTTING JUST
BY WAY OF EXPECTATIONS IN TERMS
OF HERE.
THIS IS A LITTLE LONGER THAN
WE'RE GOING FOR MOST OF OUR
WORK SESSIONS BUT IT'S ALSO A
PROJECT OF MOMENT THAT I KNOW
THERE ARE QUESTIONS IN THE ROOM
AND OUTSIDE OF THE ROOM SO
PERHAPS WE CAN TARGET ABOUT
GETTING TO PUBLIC COMMENT AT
NINE THIRTY UNDERSTANDING THAT
IF PEOPLE COUNCIL MEMBERS,
AUDIENCE MEMBERS NEED TO HIT
THE ROAD BECAUSE OF THE LITTLE
BIT OF EXTENDED TIME, THEN YOU
KNOW NO NO SHANK'S ASHAME
KATHIA BREAKS THANKS.
THERE'S LOTS TO LIKE ABOUT THIS
PROJECT CERTAINLY THIS IS THE
FIRST NOTABLE PROJECT ONE AND
SO IT'S EXCITING TO SEE
SOMETHING THAT'S YOU KNOW,
DENSE AND YOU KNOW VIBRANT AND
AND AIMING TO REINVIGORATE A
PORTION OF OUR PART OF OUR TOWN
SO THAT THAT'S ALL GOOD.
HOWEVER I HAVE SOME CONCERNS
ABOUT THE SORT THE BASIC
PREMISE UPON WHICH A LOT
OF THESE TASKS ARE BASED WHICH
IS AROUND THE THREE PARKING
STRUCTURES.
SO THERE WAS A GASP
AND THE ASK
OF THE CITY IS TO INVEST IN
THREE PARKING STRUCTURES THAT
ARE FURTHER INVESTING IN ARE
YOU KNOW, ON AUTO DOMINATED
LIFESTYLES, RIGHT.
SO THAT THOSE FOLKS CAN GO TO
ANOTHER GAS STATION AND OUR
COMMUNITY LIKELY AND FURTHER
POLLUTE OUR COMMUNITY.
WE KNOW THERE'S MANY
BROWNFIELD'S ACROSS THE ACROSS
TOWN AS WELL UNFORTUNATELY FROM
PAST POLLUTION FROM GAS
STATIONS OR ANY OTHER SOURCE.
AND SO THIS THIS PROJECT IS
ALSO
A MODEL OF OF WHAT TYPES
OF ASSETS WE'RE GOING TO SEE IN
AS WE FURTHER REDEVELOP ALONG
OUR OTHER C1 CORRIDORS.
AND SO IT'S SETTING THAT IT'S
SETTING THAT MODEL FOR WHAT'S
WHAT'S COMING NEXT AND WHAT
THOSE ASSETS ARE GOING TO BE
FOR US.
AND SO I AM FULLY SUPPORTIVE
OF INVESTING IN THIS IN THIS I
THINK THE IDEA THAT THE
COMMUNITY THAT THE CITY WOULD
INVEST IN THIS ONE PROJECT IS
ENTIRELY REASONABLE BUT I DO
FIND THE ASKE PROBLEMATIC.
SO TO GO A LITTLE FURTHER INTO
THAT OR SOME OF YOU CAME IN AS
A MEMBER OF A DENHA AND I WERE
LISTENING TO THE ENERGY
COMMISSION MEETING WHICH WAS
PRESENTING ARE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY.
SO I HAVE THAT DATA IN FRONT
OF ME SINCE SINCE 2020
OF COURSE WHEN THINGS ARE
BETTER WE SAW A NICE DECREASES
.
OUR GREENHOUSE GASES HAVE BEEN
INCREASING IN OUR COMMUNITY
WHICH IS IS THE OPPOSITE
DIRECTION THAT WE'RE AIMING TO
GO.
RIGHT.
AND SO TWO THIRDS OF OUR
EMISSIONS COME FROM BUILDINGS
OF WHICH YOU HAVE NOT MENTIONED
THAT THIS IS GOING TO BE A
CARBON NEUTRAL PROJECT AND THEN
ANOTHER THIRD COME FROM LOCAL
TRANSPORTATION.
I DON'T SEE YOU KNOW, THE FACT
THAT WE WOULD HAVE PARKING ON
THIS SITE, THE FACT THAT WE
WOULD HAVE PARKING GARAGES ALL
THAT MAKE SENSE.
>> BUT IT'S WHAT'S THE CITY IS
INVESTING IN FOR THIS PROJECT.
SO AND IN FACT WE ARE BACK ON
PAR IN TERMS OF LOCAL
TRANSPORTATION EMISSIONS WITH
WHAT IT WAS IN TWENTY NINETEEN
AND TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND TWENTY
NINETEEN IT'S BEEN PRETTY
PRETTY STABLE AROUND THERE.
SO THE PROBLEM IS THAT WE'RE
NOT HEADED IN THE DIRECTION
THAT WE WANT TO GO AND THE
QUESTION IS IF WE'RE GOING TO
BE INVESTING IN INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT'S HELPING US TO TO NOT
MEET THAT DIRECTION SO I HAVE
SOME I GUESS SOME FUNDAMENTAL
CONCERNS AROUND THE ASK.
I ALSO HAVE SOME CONCERNS
AROUND THE CONCEPT OF CREATING
A PARKING AUTHORITY.
AND SO I THINK MAYBE THESE
QUESTIONS MIGHT BE DIRECTED
MORE TOWARDS YOU, MR. TONY, IN
TERMS OF THINKING ABOUT THAT AS
A VISION FOR THE CITY THAT WE
WOULD SET THAT UP.
OBVIOUSLY THE DDA I THINK HAS
DONE AN OUTSTANDING JOB IN
TERMS MANAGING THE PARKING THAT
WE HAVE IN OUR COMMUNITY WHEN
TIMES ARE TOUGH, THE DDA IS IN
SERVICE TO THE DOWNTOWN AND ALL
OF THOSE BUSINESSES IN THE
DOWNTOWN IN TERMS OF DEVELOPING
NEW PARKING AUTHORITY AT LEAST
IN THE BEGINNING WE WOULD BE IN
SERVICE TO THIS PARTICULAR
DEVELOPMENT AND SHOULD WE SEE
MORE DOWNTURNS IN THE ECONOMY?
WE HAVE A FINANCIAL STAKE IN
THAT THE WELL-BEING OF THAT
OF COURSE WE ALWAYS HAVE A
FINANCIAL STAKE IN THE
WELL-BEING OF OUR DEVELOPMENT,
OUR COMMUNITY.
BUT IF YOU COULD JUST TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, THE YOUR THINKING AROUND
SETTING UP A PARKING AUTHORITY
AND YOU YOU MENTIONED THIS
MAYBE BEING THE FIRST OF OF
MANY PROJECTS AT MIT.
YOU KNOW, WE MIGHT INVEST IT IN
SOMETHING.
SO IF YOU COULD JUST SPEAK A
LITTLE BIT MORE TO THAT, I
GUESS I'LL START FROM THE SORT
OF GENERAL PREMISE THAT IF IN
FACT DEVELOPMENTS THAT OCCURRED
OTHER TAKE ONE QUARTER'S MIRROR
THE MAGNITUDE OF THIS ONE I'M
MAKING THE ASSUMPTION THAT
WE'RE GOING TO BE ASKED IN THE
FUTURE TO PARTICIPATE.
I CAN'T TELL YOU SPECIFICALLY
WE'D BE ASKED TO PARTICIPATE IN
PARKING BUT WE COULD THE CITY
CONCLUDED AT SOME POINT PRIOR
TO MY ARRIVAL THAT WE DON'T
MANAGE PARKING WELL THAT'S WHY
THE DDA HAS IT TO BEGIN WITH
THE DDA AS IT IS STRUCTURED IS
NOT AN ENTITY THAT HAS BONDING
AUTHORITY UNTO ITSELF.
A PARKING AUTHORITY DOES THE
DDA HAS ZERO INTEREST BUT IN
FACT THEY SEE IT AS A CONFLICT
TO MANAGE THE PARKING
ASSOCIATED WITH S SO IF THEY
ARE NOT GOING TO DO IT AND IT
HAS TO BE DONE PARTICULARLY IF
IT'S A CITY ASSET, WHAT IS THE
BEST ENTITY TO DO IT?
WHAT IS THE BEST ENTITY TO DO
IT IN A MANNER THAT ENSURES
THAT THE PARKING ASSETS ARE
PROPERLY CARED FOR?
THAT'S WHAT PARKING AUTHORITIES
DO.
I HAVE HAD THEM IN PREVIOUS
STOPS.
I SET ONE UP IN LEXINGTON,
KENTUCKY ABOUT TWENTY YEARS AGO
.
IF WE WERE TO SAY THERE'LL BE
NO FURTHER PARKING ASK ANY
OF THE OTHER TO SEE ONE
QUARTER'S AND YOU WOULD SAY IF
THAT WERE A CERTAINTY WOULD YOU
STILL WANT TO DO THE PARKING
AUTHORITY?
I WOULD HAVE TO THINK ABOUT IT
BUT I WOULD NOT BE COMFORTABLE
EVER RECOMMENDING TO YOU THAT
CITY GOVERNMENT PROPER SHOULD
BE MANAGING THE PARKING ASSET
BECAUSE WE'VE ALREADY PROVEN WE
CAN DO IT AND IF IN FACT THE
PARKING INVESTMENT IN THIS DEAL
FOR THE THREE DECS IS IN FACT
OF THE MAGNITUDE OF A NUMBER
THAT MARTY MENTIONED, YOU NEED
A AN ENTITY THAT HAS CAPACITY
TO MANAGE IT AND TO ME THAT IS
AN AUTHORITY NOT CITY STAFF AND
NOT A DATE.
IT'S ALREADY SAID THEY DON'T
WANT TO DO IT.
SO THAT'S WHERE I'M COMING FROM
.
I GUESS JUST TO ADD ON TO THAT
A LITTLE BIT, I THINK THIS
MAYBE JUST MAYBE MORE MORE
COMMENTARY RIGHT NOW.
SO I'M THINKING, YOU KNOW,
WE'VE WE SAW IN THE DEPARTMENT
OF LOWERTOWN THAT A YOU KNOW, A
PARKING STRUCTURE WAS PUT IN
WITHIN THAT DEVELOPMENT THAT'S
REASONABLE.
THE DEVELOPMENTS MIGHT SEE THAT
AS A BETTER IT'S A BETTER USE
OF LAND FOR SURE TO BE BUILDING
UP RATHER THAN OUT IN TERMS
OF PARKING.
BUT I THAT WAS FINANCED BY THE
BY THE DEVELOPMENT AND SO, YOU
KNOW, I JUST I CONTINUE TO HAVE
SOME RESERVATIONS THAT THAT WE
WOULD BE HEADED IN THIS
DIRECTION IN TERMS OF THE TYPES
OF THINGS THAT WOULD MAKE THIS
THIS PROJECT FINANCIALLY
VIABLE.
SO I GUESS THE QUESTION IS, YOU
KNOW WHAT OTHER PERHAPS FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM YOU KNOW WHAT
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS HAVE BEEN
GIVEN TOWARDS, YOU KNOW, THE
LEVELS OF INVESTMENT AND
INFRASTRUCTURE INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT'S GOING TO SERVE THE
COMMUNITY AT LARGE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT HELPS YOU
MEET YOUR SUSTAINABILITY GOALS
WHICH HOPEFULLY ARE, YOU KNOW,
ABOVE AND BEYOND WHAT ARE
REQUIRED BY BY BY RIGHT
.
MAYBE A CLARIFYING QUESTION
ABOUT YOUR QUESTION.
ARE YOU ASKING WHAT OTHER
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS THE CITY
MIGHT INVEST IN AS OPPOSED TO
PARKING?
>> IS THAT THE YEAH.
I'M SURE IN TERMS CORRECT.
I MEAN ESSENTIALLY THERE'S
THERE'S BEEN AN ANALYSIS TO SEE
WHAT WHAT WOULD MAKE THIS
PROJECT FINANCIALLY VIABLE.
YOU KNOW, I'M CURIOUS WHAT
OTHER TYPES INFRASTRUCTURE
COULD COULD POTENTIALLY BE
SPLIT SO WE HAVE DONE SOME
ANALYSIS AND I'LL SAY A COUPLE
OF THINGS IN IN NOT BEING AN
EXPERT IN THE BROWNFIELD
STATUTE SPECIFICALLY BUT HAVING
DONE DEALS WITH OTHER SIMILAR
STATUTES AND OTHER STATES THERE
ARE A SPECIFIED NUMBER OF USES
FOR THE PROCEEDS THAT COME FROM
FROM A TIFF ARRANGEMENT LIKE
THE ONE THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT.
MOST OF THOSE USES AND
PARTICULARLY TO THE EXTENT THAT
THEY ARE GOING TO BE PAID FOR
WITH TAX EXEMPT FINANCING FROM
A BOND STANDPOINT WHICH
PROVIDES A MUCH LOWER CAPITAL
RATE AND THEREFORE MUCH GREATER
EFFICIENCY OF PROCEEDS FALL
INTO CATEGORIES THAT ARE
PARKING STREETS AND UTILITIES
AND SOME OTHER ANCILLARY
THINGS.
BUT YOU KNOW, A BROAD BUCKET
OF WHAT IS WIDELY ASSUMED TO BE
PUBLIC USES AND PUBLIC USES FOR
A PRIVATE SITE LIKE THIS DON'T
ADD UP TO NEARLY THE SAME
NUMBER OF DOLLARS AS THE
PARKING STRUCTURES THEMSELVES.
>> I THINK THE THE STATEMENT
THAT I MADE EARLIER IS VERY
REAL.
WE WOULD LIKE TO NOT NEED THE
PARKING THAT WE NEED IN THE
CURRENT ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT
AND FROM A DEMAND STANDPOINT IN
ORDER TO ATTRACT THE RESIDENTS
THAT WE WANT TO ATTRACT IN THE
ENTERTAINMENT OPTIONS THAT WE
WANT TO ATTRACT.
AND AND WHILE WE'VE DONE SOME
ANALYSIS AND WE ALWAYS DO A
FEASIBLE ANALYSIS ON WHAT THE
OTHER OPTIONS ARE, THEY JUST
PALE IN COMPARISON FROM FROM A
NEED PERSPECTIVE AND IT ALSO
OUTSIDE OF PAYING FOR THE
PARKING THE
WITH IT PAINTING A
NEW COMPARISON, IT JUST ENDS UP
BEING A PROJECT THAT'S NOT
ECONOMICALLY VIABLE AT THIS
SCALE AND IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT
NOTHING COULD BE BUILT WITHOUT
PARKING DECKS BUT NOTHING
OF DENSITY COULD BE BUILT WITH
PARKING DECKS AND SO I'D BE
REMISS IF I PUT PERCENTAGES
OF REAL DOLLAR FIGURES ON IT
TONIGHT.
I HAVEN'T RESEARCHED THE GAP
BETWEEN THE OTHER
INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS AND THE
PARKING COSTS OF RECENT BUT
IT'S A MULTIPLE TIMES
DIFFERENCE IN WHAT WE'RE
ALLOWED TO SPEND ON OTHER
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS OTHER THAN
PARKING AND THE AVAILABLE
PROCEEDS THAT EXIST FOR IT.
SO THERE HAS BEEN SOME
FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS ON IT.
WE LOOKED AT DOING THE PROJECT
ENTIRELY PRIVATELY WHEN WE
FIRST LOOKED AT IT.
TWENTY FOUR ACTUALLY TWENTY
EIGHT MONTHS AGO NOW AND IT IT
WASN'T FEASIBLE IN PART BECAUSE
OF THE PARKING DECKS IN LARGE
PART BECAUSE OF THE PARKING
DECKS.
IT'S A SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNT
OF INFRASTRUCTURE THAT NEEDS TO
BE BUILT AND THEN ONCE IT'S
BUILT IT ALSO GETS TAXED AND SO
THERE'S A FEEDBACK LOOP THAT
HAPPENS THAT MAKES PARKING
REALLY A DRAIN ON PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT AS A RESULT OF IT
BECAUSE THE TAXABLE VALUE
ITSELF ENDS UP ENDS UP MAKING
IT ALMOST ENTIRELY FINANCIALLY
FEASIBLE FOR PRIVATE PARTIES TO
TO DO IT AT SCALE FOR
DEVELOPMENT LIKE THIS.
A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS AND
COMMENTS.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
HASN'T BEEN TALKED ABOUT YET I
DON'T THINK IN DETAIL IS THAT
THIS PROJECT IS A VERY LARGE
ASSEMBLAGE OF PARCELS AND AS I
UNDERSTAND IT INCLUDES A LOT
OF PRIVATE ROADS, BIKEWAYS AND
WALKWAYS THAT CREATE A LOT
OF CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN THE
NORTH AND THE SOUTH AND THE
EAST AND THE WEST WHICH IS
AWESOME.
BUT NOW THAT I'VE BEEN IN THIS
BODY FOR TWO YEARS, I HAVE SEEN
HOW OLDER DEVELOPMENTS HAVE
CREATED AMENITIES SUC AS
PATHWAYS THAT HAVE EVENTUALLY
CRUMBLED AND THEN WHEN THEY DO
IT IS DIFFICULT TO GET THEM
TAKEN CARE OF APPROPRIATELY.
SO I GUESS WHAT I'M WONDERING
IS MAYBE MORE OF A CITY STAFF
QUESTION IS WITH ALL OF THESE
BENEFITS THAT ARE COMING
CONNECTIVITY, HOW CAN THE CITY
ENSURE THAT THEY PERSIST
THROUGHOUT TIME LIKE WE WOULD
IF THEY WERE OUR OWN
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ROADS
CAN
PASS THAT AGAIN?
>> SURE.
BASICALLY, YOU KNOW, WE HAVE
SOME PATHS IN THE CITY THAT ARE
PRIVATELY OWNED BUT WERE
CREATED AS PART OF A SITE PLAN
TO CONNECT NEIGHBORHOODS, OK,
THEY START CRUMBLING BECAUSE
THE CITY DOESN'T OWN THEM, SAID
HE'S NOT ABLE TO FIX THEM AND
OFTEN THE SOLUTION IS THAT THEY
GET SHUT DOWN BY THE PRIVATE
ENTITY.
I MEAN WE JUST HAD SOMETHING
LIKE THAT HAPPEN THIS WEEK.
SO I'M JUST WONDERING AS WE
THINK ABOUT HOW BIG OF AN
ASSEMBLAGE THIS IS AND HOW MUCH
IT MATTERS THAT YOU CAN CONNECT
FROM DIFFERENT SIDES BUT THE
PATHWAYS ARE NOT CITY OWNED.
THEY'RE NOT PUBLIC.
>> HOW DOES THE CITY GUARANTEE
OR HAVE ANY RECOURSE TO MAKE
SURE THAT THOSE REMAIN GOOD
INFRASTRUCTURE OVER TIME
?
THE BEST WAY THAT I CAN ANSWER
YOUR QUESTION AND I BECAUSE
WHAT YOU'RE REALLY ASKING ME
WOULD COME DOWN TO WE WOULD
HAVE TO HAVE A GRANULAR ANSWER
IN A GRANULAR STRATEGY WOULD WE
KNOW EXACTLY WHAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT AND WHERE IT IS WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT ESSENTIALLY
CREATING A NEW NEIGHBORHOOD.
THERE'S ALREADY BEEN THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A BUSINESS FOR
THAT AREA.
THERE'S ALREADY BEEN A TENSION
BEING BROUGHT FROM THE CITY
GOVERNMENT ENTITY TO THE AREA.
WE SEE IT AS SOMETHING LONG
TERM.
IT'S GOING TO BE A TAX
GENERATOR FOR THE CITY.
>> SO THE CITY WILL HAVE THE
ABILITY TO MAKE LONG TERM
DECISIONS ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS
WITH THE REVENUE THAT'S
GENERATED FROM THE AREA IN
OTHER COMMUNITIES.
THEY TAKE THAT TO PLOW BACK
INTO THE AREA ITSELF TO ENSURE
THAT IT STAYS WHERE IT NEEDS TO
STAY.
I CAN'T MAKE THAT STATEMENT TO
YOU TONIGHT BECAUSE WE'RE JUST
TRYING TO GET THE DEAL
STRUCTURE I CAN GIVE YOU A
BETTER ANSWER IN TIME FOR THE
MAINTENANCE OF THE AREA TO MAKE
SURE THAT IT'S MEETING
STANDARDS CODE ET CETERA THEN I
CAN'T TONIGHT BUT WHEN YOU
THINK ABOUT CREATING THE ENTIRE
NEIGHBORHOOD, WE'RE GOING TO
WRAP EVERYTHING INTO WHAT IT
WILL TAKE TO PRESERVE THE
INVESTMENT THAT'S BEING MADE.
WE WILL HAVE OUR ROLE.
JENNIFER HALL WILL HAVE HER
ROLE THE PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
TEAM WILL HAVE ITS ROLE AND
THEY ALL WILL HAVE TO
CONTINUOUSLY WORK TOGETHER.
PLUS YOU'RE ALSO TALKING ABOUT
BUILDING CAPACITY THAT'S GOING
TO BE BRINGING IN ADDITIONAL
BUSINESSES, ADDITIONAL WORKERS,
ADDITIONAL AMENITIES THAT WILL
ALL PLAY A ROLE IN MANAGING THE
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT WE'RE
CREATING.
THANK YOU FOR THE OTHER THING.
IT'S ANOTHER KIND OF QUESTION
AND COMMENT AND REALLY JUST A
CLARIFICATION ABOUT THE 30 YEAR
TIFF DOES IT WHEN YOU SAY IT'S
A THIRTY YEAR TIFF, DOES THAT
MEAN THAT WE ARE DOES THAT MEAN
THAT THE INCREMENT FOR THIRTY
YEARS GOES TO THE PAYMENT
OF THE PARKING X YOU AND YOU
WERE LISTENING TO WHAT YOU'RE
ASKING ME A QUESTION.
THAT'S WHEN YOU IT WAS A TOUGH
QUESTION SORRY.
I WANT TO MAKE SURE I
UNDERSTAND WHAT IS MEANT BY A
THIRTY YEAR TIFF TO INVEST IN
THE PARKING GARAGES DOESN'T
MEAN THAT WE ARE DEFERRING THE
INCREMENT THAT WE WOULD GET ON
THE INCREASE IN THE LAND VALUE
FOR THIRTY YEARS TO INVEST IN
THE PARKING GARAGES WANT THAT
ALL WHETHER THE ENVIRONMENTAL
REMEDIATION, ALL ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITIES INCLUDING ANY
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT AND
THE CREATION THE PARKING DECKS
WHETHER WE OWN OR NOT WOULD BE
REIMBURSED THROUGH THE THIRTY
YEARS OF INCREMENT.
YES OK I GUESS WHERE I'M GOING
WITH THIS IS SIMILAR TO COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGGS.
YOU KNOW, JUST TAG ON HER
COMMENTS.
I DO HAVE CONCERNS THE CITY
INVESTING IN PARKING GARAGES
WHEN WE HAVE SO MANY OTHER CITY
GOALS THAT WE'RE TRYING TO
CHANGE BEHAVIOR AROUND AND IT
SEEMS TO ME THAT ON THE ONE
HAND WE WOULD WANT TO MAKE SURE
THOSE PARKING DECKS ARE FULL
BECAUSE WE NEED TO MAKE BACK
THE MONEY THAT WE'RE INVESTING
IN IT.
WELL, AT THE SAME TIME WE'RE
TRYING TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR IN
THE OTHER DIRECTION.
MY OTHER CONCERN IS THAT IF I
UNDERSTANDING IT CORRECTLY, YOU
KNOW, ONE OF OUR GOALS IS TO
PUT PEOPLE WHERE THE TRANSIT
LINES ARE AND TO GET THE
INCREASED TAX REVENUE TO INVEST
IN BETTER TRANSIT SERVICE AND
BUY INVESTING THAT MONEY IN THE
PARKING GARAGES.
IT'S NOT GOING TO THE AID THE
MTA SO THAT TO ME IS JUST
THAT'S THAT'S MY BIGGEST
STUMBLING BLOCK WITH INVESTING
IN THE PARKING GARAGES.
SO THAT'S A
GOOD COMMENT AND A
QUESTION FIRST IS ALL THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PORTION YOU
KNOW EMBEDDED IN YOUR COMMENTS
TONIGHT WAS THE FACT THAT MANY
OF THE A LOT OF THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING STRATEGY THE CITY HAS
USED OVER THE YEARS HAS INCLUDE
PROJECTS THAT HAVE THAT HAD
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR A FIXED
TERM THAT EXPIRED.
>> YOU KNOW, SOME OF THESE
TERMS ARE 30 YEARS AND YOU
KNOW, SOME OF THOSE EXPIRED
QUITE, QUITE RECENTLY.
AND I'M LOOKING AT THE COUNTY
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DASHBOARD
AND THEY SAY A THOUSAND AND
FIFTEEN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
UNITS COUNTY WIDE HAVE BEEN
LOST FROM EXPIRING AGREEMENTS
AND I THINK THAT MIGHT BE SINCE
2015 OR MAYBE THAT'S JUST
TOTAL.
BUT SO TO MY QUESTION YOU HAD
SAID THAT THESE THESE UNITS
WILL BE RESTRICTED.
ARE THEY PERMANENTLY RESTRICTED
?
>> YES.
OK, THAT'S THAT'S A GREAT THING
AND I THINK CAN'T BE
UNDERESTIMATED.
I REALLY DO.
SO I WANTED TO UNDERWRITE IT
THE I GUESS THE BROADER COMMENT
I GUESS THE HOUSING COMMISSION
I THINK ALSO LOOKING AT THIS
DASHBOARD IS ADDED TWO HUNDRED
ELEVEN UNITS SINCE 2015 THERE
ARE THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
PLANNED UNITS EXPECTED TO COME
ONLINE IN THE NEXT THREE YEARS.
BUT JUST TO REMIND EVERYBODY
YOU THE PROMISE OR YOU KNOW THE
ASPIRATION OF THE COMMUNITY
WHEN WE PASSED THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING MILLAGE WAS TO BUILD
100 UNITS A YEAR GETTING TO
2000 UNITS OVER THE LIFETIME
OF THE MILLAGE IF YOU DO SOME
MATH WE'RE RUNNING A LITTLE BIT
BEHIND IN THIS TWO HUNDRED TWO
HUNDRED NEW UNITS THAT THAT
REPRESENTS ALMOST 50 PERCENT
OF THE THINGS THAT WE HAVE IN
THE YOU KNOW, BE A 50 PERCENT
INCREASE ON WHAT'S EXISTING IN
THE PIPELINE.
SO THERE'S REAL COMMUNITY VALUE
THERE AND REAL BENEFIT THERE.
ALSO TO NOTE ON THE PARKING
JUST A PLAIN ABOUT THE ZONING.
THE SLIDE SAID THAT THIS WAS
PARKED JUST SLIGHTLY OVER ONE
SPACE PER THOUSAND UNITS
.
I BELIEVE THAT'S ONE STANDARD
IS IS JUST AROUND THREE SPACES
PER THOUSAND UNITS.
IS THAT CORRECT?
SO THIS IS COMING IN A LITTLE
BIT UNDER THE PARKING MAXIMUM
OR YOU KNOW, ACTUALLY COMING IN
ON AS 30 PERCENT OF THE PARKING
MAXIMUM FOR TAXI ONE.
I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
YOU SAID ONE POINT SIX PER
THOUSAND SQUARE FEET, THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET NOT UNITS BUT YES,
YES, YES, YES.
THAT'S THE WRONG THING.
IT'S SUBSTANTIALLY LESS THAN
THE MAXIMUM MAX IS THREE
THOUSAND.
THIS IS COMING IN AT ONE.
SO ABOUT A THIRD ABOUT A THIRD
THAT'S SO AT ONE LEVEL THIS IS
IF YOU CAN YOU CAN HAVE FRASERS
RIGHT THERE.
BUT I'VE HEARD OFTEN THAT YOU
DON'T OFTEN SEE FULL PARKING
STRUCTURES FINANCED PRIVATELY
BECAUSE THE TAXATION MAKES IT
JUST TOO DIFFICULT.
I GUESS ESSENTIALLY THEY'RE TOO
VALUABLE.
THEY TOO MUCH TAXABLE VALUE FOR
HOW MUCH THEY GENERATE.
>> SO I'M DEAF ABLE TO MAYBE
COMMENT ON THAT.
JUST THE DIFFICULTY GENERALLY
IN FINANCING PARKING STRUCTURES
AND HONESTLY
WHEN YOU LOOK AT
YOUR TEAM AND THEY LOOK BACK AT
YOU, YOU SAID THE DIFFICULTY IN
FINANCING A PARKING STRUCTURE,
PART OF THE PARKING SEARCHES
OF A CERTAIN SIZE.
WELL, FOR A PRIVATE ENTITY AS
OPPOSED TO A PUBLIC ENTITY, THE
BEST WAY I CAN RESPOND TO YOU
COUNCIL OVER WHAT'S IN IT IS
NOT UNHEARD OF THAT THERE ARE
PARKING GARAGES BUILT WHERE IT
EQUATES TO SEVEN EIGHTY NINETY
THOUSAND DOLLARS A SLOT THAT'S
THAT'S NOT AN UNHEARD OF THING.
IT'S VERY EXPENSIVE TO BUILD
THEM.
I'M NOT AWARE OF ANY ENTITY
THAT WOULD DO IT WITH CASH.
>> SO YOU TEND TO BOND AND SO
WE WOULD IF WE DID IT AND WE
HAVEN'T GOT TO THAT POINT WE
WOULD BE DOING A BOND ISSUANCE
AND YOU'RE PAYING BACK THE
BOND.
YOU'RE SERVICING THE BOND BASED
ON THE REVENUE AND UTILIZATION
OF THE FACILITY.
TO ME THAT'S WHY IT IS
IMPERATIVE THAT YOU HAVE TO
ENSURE THAT BOTH THE PRICING
AND THE UPKEEP OF THE ASSET ARE
MANAGED PROPERLY TO BE ABLE TO
DO THAT.
THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM IS
ESSENTIALLY TALKING ABOUT
CREATING A MEGA PLACE WE'RE
EMBRACING PLACEMAKING THIS
WOULD BE A MEGA PLACE THAT
WOULD DRAW NOT ONLY LOCAL
ACTIVITY BUT REGIONAL ACTIVITY.
IF YOU'RE DRIVING IN FROM
AROUND THE REGION, THE
LIKELIHOOD THE ASSUMPTION IT
WOULD BE YOU'RE GOING TO PARK
IN ONE OF THOSE DECKS SO WHAT
PFM IS LOOKING AT IS THE
ASSUMPTIONS ON WILL THERE BE
SUFFICIENT REVENUE TO PAY BACK
THE FINANCING THAT YOU SIGNED
ON FOR IN THE BEGINNING WE ARE
TALKING ABOUT A WAY TO MANAGE
THE DECKS IN THE INTERIM WHILE
THE CITY IS BUILDING ITS OWN
CAPACITY.
THAT'S PART OF OUR DISCUSSION
BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY WE'RE NOT
READY RIGHT AT THE BEGINNING.
LAST THING I'LL SAY IS A
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT OF THIS
MAGNITUDE.
ANYONE WILL SEE IT THIS WAY.
I DON'T KNOW HOW ANYONE COULD
SAY YOU CAN BUILD IT AND IT'S
ZERO RISK.
I'VE NEVER SEEN THAT YOU WANT
TO BE AWARE OF YOUR RISK.
YOU WANT TO BE ABLE TO MITIGATE
YOUR RISK.
YOU WANT TO BE ABLE TO MANAGE
FOR YOUR RISK.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
BUILD HERE.
THAT'S WHY I CIRCLE BACK TO
WHAT I SAID EARLIER.
THE CITY WILL HAVE A CHOICE.
>> ARE WE WILLING TO INVEST AND
ESSENTIALLY BET ON OURSELVES OR
NOT?
IT DOESN'T PENCIL THE DEAL
WON'T PENCIL IF THE ARE THERE
IT JUST WON'T.
THANK YOU FURTHER DISCUSSION
YOUR QUESTIONS ARE THANK YOU
ALL EXTREMELY MUCH.
THANK YOU STAFF FOR WORKING
WITH THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM.
YOU KNOW, I THINK WHAT WE WE
HAVE BEFORE US IS AN EXTREMELY
INTERESTING PROPOSAL FOR OUR
FIRST ONE DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S A DEVELOPMENT OF AMBITION
IN WHICH WE WOULD BE ABLE TO IF
IT CAME TO FULL FRUITION.
>> WELCOME FIFTEEN HUNDRED NEW
AND ARBITRATES TO OUR COMMUNITY
WE WOULD BE ABLE TO WELCOME NEW
BUSINESSES.
WE'D BE ABLE TO WELCOME THE
VISITORS.
WE'D BE ABLE TO CREATE A WE
WE'RE NOT IT'S NOT OUR
OPERATION.
THE TEAM WOULD BE ABLE TO
CREATE A SPACE FOR FOLKS WHO
ALREADY LIVE HERE TO MEET THEIR
NEW FRIENDS WHO LIVE AT THE
SITE AND TO ENJOY THE AMENITIES
THAT THEY THAT THEY ENVISION.
AND IF PAST IS PROLOG WILL
REALIZE WITH RESPECT TO THE
CONCEPT THE DEVELOPMENT PART
OF ME, THE CONCEPT
OF INVESTMENT, I UNDERSTAND WHY
THE TERM IS BEING USED BUT I
THINK IT'S AN APPOSITE IN MANY
RESPECTS THE CITY IS NOT
PUTTING UP MONEY FOR US WHEN
I'M MAKING AN INVESTMENT I'M
PUTTING MY MONEY IN ON IT AND
AS FAR AS I'VE HEARD AND AS FAR
AS I PERCEIVE THAT'S NOT WHAT
WE ARE DOING.
THAT'S NOT WHAT IS PROPOSED TO
BE DONE.
IT'S PROPOSED THROUGH THE TITH
THAT WE AUTHORIZE THE TAXPAYER
TO USE THE NEW TAXES FOR
EXCLUSIVE PURPOSES THAT WE
AUTHORIZED THE TAXPAYER TO USE
THOSE NEW TAXES TO CLEAN UP THE
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION TO
UPSIZE THE PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WOULD
SERVICE THE SITE WHICH I ASSUME
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE WOULD NOT
BE FOR THIS SITE EXCLUSIVELY
BUT WOULD HAVE GENERAL
APPLICATION AND THAT WE ALLOW
THE TAXPAYER TO USE THE
INCREMENTAL TAX INCREASE TO
SUPPORT THE CAPITAL COST OF THE
GARAGES, GARAGES.
>> THE CITY WOULD THEN USE AND
RECEIVE IF THE PRO FORMA IS
CORRECT IF OUR AS OUR
CONSULTANT CONCLUDES THAT THE
CITY WILL THEN USE TO GENERATE
CASH MONEY FOR THE CITY THE
COST THE CAPITAL COST IS
DECOUPLED FROM THE INCOME THAT
WE ARE RECEIVING.
WE'RE NOT PAYING FOR THE
PARKING STRUCTURES THE THE
TAXPAYERS PAYING FOR THE
PARKING STRUCTURES.
WE ARE TAKING THE PARKING
STRUCTURES AND TAKING THE
INCOME FROM THEM.
WE ARE HELPING USING OUR PUBLIC
OUR PUBLIC STATUS BUT WE ARE
NOT, IF YOU WILL, INVESTING OUR
OWN OUR SKIN IS NOT IN THE GAME
AS TO THE SCALE OF THE PARKING
BECAUSE THAT IS AN OBVIOUSLY A
TOPIC OF OF CONVERSATION I JUST
OBSERVED THAT TWENTY SIX
HUNDRED IS A LOT TO THINK
THROUGH BUT IT'S ALSO TRUE THAT
THERE ARE ESSENTIALLY FIFTEEN
HUNDRED UNITS FIFTEEN HUNDRED
SPACES THEY'RE NOW PRESENTLY
AND SO THE PROJECT AS
CONTEMPLATED DOES NOT ADD
TWENTY SIX HUNDRED SPACES THE
PROJECT IS CONTEMPLATED ADDS
1100 SPACES ELEVEN HUNDRED
SPACES WHICH WILL SERVICE THE
EXISTING OFFICES AND THE 1500
PEOPLE KNEW ANN RIGHTS WHO
WOULD WE WOULD EXPECT TO LIVE
THERE AND THE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
KEYS THAT WOULD COME TO THE
HOTEL AND THE EXISTING OUR
BRIGHTS WHO WOULD COME VISIT
THEIR NEW FRIENDS AT THE SITE
TAMAI THAT THAT'S THAT'S THAT
IS A THAT'S A MATTER NOW THAT
IS THAT IS A THAT IS AN
EFFICIENT INCREASE IS PERHAPS
THE BEST WAY TO DESCRIBE IT
ANYWAY THERE IS THERE'S LOTS TO
THINK THROUGH AND THERE'S LOTS
TO DELIBERATE ABOUT AND WE WILL
AND THE MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
WILL AND I JUST WANT TO AGAIN
THANK FOLKS WHO HAVE COME TO
THE CITY WITH THE VISION AND
FOLKS WHO WORK THE CITY FOR
LISTENING TO THE COUNCIL AND
UNDERSTANDING THAT WE WE HAVE A
CITY THAT HAS A STATUS QUO AND
THE STATUS HAS GOTTEN US WHERE
WE ARE.
AND WHILE THERE'S ASPECTS
OF WHERE WE ARE THAT WE LOVE,
THERE ARE ASPECTS OF WHERE WE
ARE THAT NEED WORK, THAT NEED
FIXING AND
ONE IS ONE WAY TO
ACCOMPLISH THAT.
I SAID NINE THIRTY IT'S NINE
THIRTY EXTRA QUESTIONS I ASSUME
WILL GO TO MR. TONY WHO WILL
THEN DO NOTHING ELSE BUT ANSWER
OUR SILLY QUESTIONS.
OK, NO LATER WHY DON'T WE MAY I
SIT DOWN.
MY QUESTION IS SIMPLY WHAT IS
THE BEST WAY FOR US TO SUBMIT
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS TO NEW
YORK SO WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC
COMMENT.
PUBLIC COMMENT.
GENERAL TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCIL OF THE
COMMUNITY THAT MATTERS
MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
PUBLIC COMMENT ONE GENERAL TIME
ONE NEEDS TO WHAT ONE DOES NOT
NEED TO ASSIGN UP AN ADVANCE IN
THIS CONTEXT.
BUT SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES
WILL HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN
THIRTY SECONDS ARE REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME'S EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE
THE FLOOR.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC
COMMENT?
>> IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE LINE
LIKE TO SPEAK BECOMING MAYOR?
WE DON'T HAVE ANY CALLERS ON
LINE SEEN ON PUBLIC COMMENT IS
CLOSED MAY HAVE A MOTION TO
ADJOURN.
PLEASE MOVE BY OUR ACKMANN
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR POSED.
>> WE'RE ADJOURNED